A
Chapter One
The queen, for her part, is the unifying force ofthe community; ifshe is removed fromthe hive, the workers very quickly sense herabsence. Aftera few hours, or
even less, they showunmistakablesigns of queenlessness. —Man and Insects
t night I would lie in bed and watch the show, how bees ueezed through the cracks of my bedroomwalland flew circles around the room, making that propeller
sound, a high-pitched zzzzzzthat hummed alongmy skin. I watched their wings shining like bits ofchromein the dark and felt thelonging build inmy chest. The way
those bees flew, noteven looking foraflower, just flying for thefeel ofthe wind, splitmy heart down its seam. During the day I heard themtunneling through the walls of
my bedroom, sounding like a radio tuned to static in the next room, and I imagined themin there turning the walls into honeycombs, with honey seeping out for me to
taste. The bees came the summer of 1964, the summer I turned fourteen and my life went spinning off into a whole new orbit, and I mean whole new orbit. Looking
back on now, I want to say the bees weresent to me. I want to say they showed up liketheangelGabrielappearing to the VirginMary, setting events inmotion Icould
never have guessed. I knowit is presumptuous to compare my small lifeto hers, but I havereason to believeshe wouldn’t mind; I will get to that. Right nowit’senough
to say that despiteeverything that happened thatsummer, I remain tender toward the bees.
July 1, 1964, I lay in bed, waiting for the bees to showup, thinking ofwhat Rosaleen had said when I told herabout their nightly visitations.
‘Bees swarmbefore death,’she’d said. Rosaleen had worked for us since mymother died. My daddy—who I called T. Ray because ‘Daddy’ never fit him—had
pulled her out ofthe peach orchard, whereshe’d worked as one of his pickers. She had a big round faceand a body that sloped out fromher neck likea pup tent, and
she was so black that night seemed to seep fromher skin. She lived alone in a little house tucked back in the woods, not far fromus, and came every day to cook,
clean,and be my stand-inmother. Rosaleen had never had achild herself, so for thelast ten years I’d been her pet guinea pig. Bees swarmbefore death. She was full of
crazy ideas that I ignored, but I lay there thinking about this one, wondering if the bees had come withmy death inmind. Honestly, I wasn’t that disturbed by the idea.
Every one of those bees could have descended onme like a flock ofangels and stungme till I died, and it wouldn’t have been the worst thing to happen. People who
think dying is the worst thing don’t knowathing about life.
My mother died when I was four years old. It was a fact of life, but if I brought it up, people would suddenly get interested in their hangnails and cuticles, or else
distant places in the sky, and seemnot to hear me. Once in a while, though, some caring soul would say, ‘Just put it out of your head, Lily. It was an accident. You
didn’tmean to do it.’
That night I lay in bed and thought about dying and going to be with my mother in paradise. I would meet her saying, ‘Mother, forgive. Please forgive,’and she
would kiss my skin till it grewchapped and tellmeI was not to blame. She would tellmethis for thefirst ten thousand years. The next ten thousand years she would fix
my hair. She would brush it into such a tower of beauty, people all over heaven would drop their harps just to admire it. You can tell which girls lack mothers by the
look of their hair. My hair was constantly going off in eleven wrong directions, and T. Ray, naturally, refused to buy me bristle rollers, so all year I’d had to roll it on
Welch’s grape juice cans, which had nearly turned me into an insomniac. I was always having to choose between decent hair and a good night’s sleep. I decided I
would take four or five centuries to tell her about the special misery of living with T. Ray. He had an orneriness year-round, but especially in the summer, when he
worked his peach orchards daylight to dusk. Mostly I stayed out of his way. His only kindness was for Snout, his bird dog, who slept in his bed and got her stomach
scratched anytime she rolled onto her wiry back. I’ve seen Snout pee on T. Ray’s boot and it not get a rise out of him. I had asked God repeatedly to do something
about T. Ray. He’d goneto church for forty yearsand was only gettingworse. It seemed likethis should tellGod something. I kicked back thesheets. Theroomsat in
perfect stillness, not one bee anywhere. Everyminute I looked at the clock onmy dresser and wondered what was keeping them. Finally, sometime close to midnight,
whenmy eyelids had nearly given up thestrain ofstaying open, a purring noisestarted over in thecorner, lowand vibrating, asound you could almost mistakeforacat.
Moments later shadows moved likespatter paintalong the walls, catching thelight when they passed the windowso Icould seethe outline ofwings. Thesound swelled
in the dark till the entire roomwas pulsating, till the air itself became alive and matted with bees. They lapped around my body, making me the perfect center of a
whirlwind cloud. I could not hear myself think for all the bee hum. I dugmy nails into my palms tillmy skin had nearly turned to herringbone. Aperson could get stung
halfto death in a roomful of bees. Still, the sight wasa true spectacle. Suddenly Icouldn’t stand not showing it offto somebody, even ifthe only person around was T.
Ray. And if he happened to get stung by a couple of hundred bees, well, I was sorry. I slid fromthe covers and dashed through the bees for the door. I woke himby
touching hisarmwith onefinger, softly at first, then harderand harder tillI was jabbing into his flesh, marveling at howhard it was.
T. Ray bolted frombed, wearing nothing but his underwear. I dragged himtoward my room, himshouting howthis better be good, howthe house damnwell better
be on fire,and Snout barking like we were on a doveshoot.
‘Bees!’ I shouted.
‘There’saswarmof bees inmy room!’But whenwe got there, they’d vanished back into the walllikethey knewhe wascoming, likethey didn’t want to wastetheir
flying stunts on him.
‘Goddamn it, Lily, thisain’t funny.’
I looked up and down the walls. I got down under the bed and begged the very dustand coils ofmy bedsprings to producea bee.
‘Theywere here,’ I said.
‘Flying everywhere.’
‘Yeah,and there wasa goddamn herd of buffalo in here, too.’
‘Listen,’ I said.
‘You can hear thembuzzing.’
Hecocked hisear toward the wallwith pretend seriousness.
‘I don’t hearany buzzing,’ hesaid,and twirled his finger beside his temple.
‘I guess theymust haveflown out ofthatcuckoo clock you calla brain. Youwake me up again, Lily,and I’ll get out the Martha Whites, you hear me?’
Martha Whites wereaformof punishment onlyT. Ray could have dreamed up. I shutmymouth instantly. Still, Icouldn’t let the matter go entirely—T. Ray thinking I
was so desperate I would inventan invasion of bees to getattention. Which is how I got the bright idea ofcatching a jar ofthese bees, presenting themto T. Ray, and
saying, ‘Nowwho’s making things up?’
My first and only memory ofmy mother was the day she died. I tried for a long time to conjure up an image of her before that, just a sliver ofsomething, like her
tuckingmeinto bed, reading theadventures ofUncle Wiggly, or hangingmy underclothes near thespace heater on ice-cold mornings. Even her picking a switch offthe
forsythia bush and stingingmy legs would have beenwelcome. The day she died was December 3, 1954
The furnace had cooked the air so hot mymother had peeled off her sweater and stood in short sleeves, jerking at the window in her bedroom, wrestling with the
stuck paint. Finally she gave up and said, ‘Well, fine, we’lljust burn the hell up in here, I guess.’
Her hair was black and generous, with thick curls circling her face, a face I could never quite coax into view, despite the sharpness ofeverything else. I raised my
arms to her, and she picked me up, saying I was way too big a girl to hold likethis, but holdingmeanyway. The moment shelifted me, I was wrapped in her smell. The
scent got laid down in me in a permanent way and had all the precision ofcinnamon. I used to go regularly into the Sylvan Mercantile and smellevery perfume bottle
they had, trying to identify it. Every timeI showed up, the perfumelady acted surprised, saying, ‘My goodness, look who’s here.’
LikeI hadn’t just been in therethe week beforeand gone down theentirerowof bottles. Shalimar, ChanelN° 5, White Shoulders. I’d say, ‘You gotanything new?’
She never did. So it was a shock when I came upon the scent on my fifth-grade teacher, who said it was nothing but plain ordinary Ponds Cold Cream. The
afternoon my mother died, there was a suitcase open on the floor, sitting near the stuck window. She moved in and out of the closet, dropping this and that into the
suitcase, not bothering to fold them. I followed her into theclosetand scooted beneath dress hemsand pant legs, into darknessand wisps of dustand little dead moths,
back where orchard mud and the moldy smell of peaches clung to T. Ray’s boots. I stuck my hands inside a pair of white high heels and clapped themtogether. The
closet floor vibrated whenever someoneclimbed thestairs belowit, which is howI knewT. Raywascoming. Over my head I heard mymother, pulling things fromthe
hangers, the swish of clothes, wire clinking together. Hurry, she said. When his shoes clomped into the room, she sighed, the breath leaving her as if her lungs had
suddenly clenched. This is the last thing I remember with perfect crispness—her breath floating down to me like a tiny parachute, collapsing without a trace among the
piles ofshoes. I don’t remember what they said, only thefury oftheir words, howtheair turned rawand full ofwelts. Later it would remind me of birds trapped insidea
closed room, flinging themselves against the windows and the walls, against each other. I inched backward, deeper into the closet, feelingmy fingers inmymouth, the
taste ofshoes, of feet. Dragged out, I didn’t know at first whose hands pulled me, then found myself inmymother’s arms, breathing her smell. She smoothed my hair,
said, ‘Don’t worry,’ buteven as shesaid it, I was peeled away byT. Ray. Hecarried meto the doorand setme down in the hallway.
‘Go to your room,’ hesaid.
‘I don’t want to,’ Icried, trying to push past him, back into theroom, back whereshe was.
‘Get in your goddamned room!’ heshouted, and shoved me. I landed against the wall, then fellforward onto my handsand knees. Liftingmy head, looking past him,
I sawher running across theroom. Running at him, yelling.
‘Leave. Her. Alone.’
I huddled on the floor beside the doorand watched through air that seemed allscratched up. I saw himtake her by the shouldersand shake her, her head bouncing
back and forth. I saw the whiteness of his lip. And then—though everything starts to blur now in my mind—she lunged away fromhiminto the closet, away fromhis
grabbing hands, scrambling for something high on ashelf. When I sawthe gun in her hand, I ran toward her, clumsy and falling, wanting to save her, to save usall. Time
folded in on itself then. What is left lies in clear yet disjointed pieces inmy head. The gun shining like a toy in her hand, how he snatched it away and waved it around.
The gun on the floor. Bending to pick it up. The noise thatexploded around us. This is what I know about myself. She was allI wanted. And I took her away. T. Ray
and I lived just outside Sylvan, South Carolina, population 3000. Peach standsand Baptistchurches, that sums it up. At the entrance to the farmwe had a bigwooden
sign with [-] painted across it in the worst orange color you’ve ever seen. I hated that sign. But the sign was nothing compared with the giant peach perched atop a
sixty-foot pole beside the gate. Everyone at schoolreferred to itas the Great Fanny, and I’mcleaning up the language. Its fleshy color, not to mention the crease down
the middle, gave it the unmistakable appearance ofa rear end. Rosaleen said it was T. Ray’s way ofmooning the entire world. That was T. Ray. He didn’t believe in
slumber parties or sock hops, whichwasn’t a big concern as I never got invited to themanyway, but he refused to drive me to town for football games, pep rallies, or
Beta Club car washes, which were held on Saturdays. He did not care that I wore clothes I made for myself in home economics class, cotton print shirtwaists with
crooked zippersand skirts hanging belowmy knees, outfits only the Pentecostal girls wore. I mightas well have worn asign onmy back:IAMNOT POPULARAND
NEVER WILLBE. I needed all the help that fashion could give me, since no one, notasingle person, had ever said, ‘Lily, you aresuch a pretty child,’except for Miss
Jennings atchurch, and she was legally blind. I watched my reflection not only in the mirror, but in store windows and across the televisionwhen it wasn’t on, trying to
getafix onmy looks. My hair was black like mymother’s but basically a nest ofcowlicks, and it worried methat I didn’t have much ofachin. I kept thinking I’d grow
one the same time my breasts came in, but it didn’t work out that way. I had nice eyes, though, what you would call Sophia Loren eyes, but still, even the boys who
woretheir hair in ducktails drippingwithVitalisand carried combs in their shirt pockets didn’t seemattracted to me, and theywereconsidered hard up. Matters below
my neck had shaped up, not that Icould show offthat part. It was fashionable to wearcashmere twinsetsand plaid kilts midthigh, but T. Ray said hellwould be an ice
rink beforeI went out likethat—did I want to end up pregnant like Bitsy Johnsonwhoseskirt barely covered herass? Howhe knewabout Bitsy isa mystery oflife, but
it was true about her skirts and true about the baby. An unfortunate coincidence is all it was. Rosaleen knew less about fashion than T. Ray did, and when it was cold,
God-help-me-Jesus, she made me go to schoolwearing long britches under my Pentecostal dresses. There was nothing I hated worse than clumps of whispering girls
who got quiet when I passed. I started picking scabs offmy body and, when I didn’t have any, gnawing the flesh around my fingernails till I was a bleeding wreck. I
worried so much about howI looked and whether I was doing things right, I felt halfthetimeI was impersonating a girlinstead ofreally being one. I had thoughtmy real
chance would come fromgoing to charmschoolat the Women’s Club last spring, Friday afternoons for six weeks, but I got barred because I didn’t have a mother, a
grandmother, oreven a measly aunt to presentme with a whiteroseat theclosing ceremony. Rosaleen doing it wasagainst therules. I’d cried tillI threwup in thesink.
‘You’recharming enough,’ Rosaleen had said, washing the vomit out ofthesink basin.
‘You don’t need to go to some highfalutin schoolto getcharm.’
‘I do so,’ I said.
‘They teach everything. How to walk and pivot, what to do with your ankles when you sit in a chair, how to get into a car, pour tea, take off your gloves…’
Rosaleen blewair fromher lips.
‘Good Lord,’ shesaid.
‘Arrangeflowers in a vase, talk to boys, tweeze youreyebrows, shave your legs,apply lipstick…’
‘Whatabout vomit in asink? They teach acharmingway to do that?’sheasked. Sometimes I purely hated her. The morning after I woke T. Ray, Rosaleen stood in
the doorway ofmy room, watchingmechasea bee with a mason jar. Her lip was rolled outso far Icould seethelittlesunrise of pink inside her mouth.
‘Whatare you doingwith that jar?’ shesaid.
‘I’mcatching bees to showT. Ray. Hethinks I’mmaking themup.’
‘Lord, give mestrength.’
She’d been shelling butter beans on the porch, and sweat glistened on the pearls of hairaround her forehead. She pulled at thefront of her dress, opening an airway
along her bosom, big and soft as couch pillows. The bee landed on the state map I kept tacked on the wall. I watched it walk along the coast of South Carolina on
scenic Highway 17. I clamped the mouth of the jar against the wall, trapping it between Charleston and Georgetown. When I slid on the lid, it went into a tailspin,
throwing itselfagainst the glass overand over with popsand clicks, remindingme ofthe hail that landed sometimes on the windows. I’d made the jaras nice as Icould
with felty petals, fat with pollen, and morethan enough nail holes in thelid to keep the bees fromperishing, sinceforallI knew, people mightcome back one day as the
very thing they killed. I brought thejar levelwithmy nose.
‘Come look at this thing fight,’ I said to Rosaleen. When she stepped in the room, her scent floated out to me, dark and spicy like the snuffshe packed inside her
cheek. She held her small jug with its coin-size mouth and a handle for her to loop her finger through. I watched her press it along her chin, her lips fluted out like a
flower, then spitacurl of black juiceinsideit. Shestared at the beeand shook her head.
‘If you getstung, don’tcome whining to me,’ shesaid, ‘‘causeIain’t gonnacare.’
That was a lie. I was the only one who knew that despite her sharp ways, her heart was more tender than a flower skin and she loved me beyond reason. I hadn’t
known this untilI waseightand she bought mean Easter-dyed biddy fromthe mercantile. I found it trembling in acorner ofits pen, thecolor of purple grapes, with sad
little eyes that cast around for its mother. Rosaleen let me bring it home, right into the living room, where I strewed a box ofQuaker Oats on the floor for it to eat and
she didn’t raise a word of protest. The chick left dollops of violet-streaked droppings all over the place, due, I suppose, to the dye soaking into its fragile system. We
had just started to clean themup when T. Ray burst in, threatening to boil thechick for dinnerand fire Rosaleen for being an imbecile. Hestarted to swoop at the biddy
with his tractor grease hands, but Rosaleen planted herselfin front of him.
‘Thereis worsethings in the housethan chicken shit,’ shesaid and looked himup onesideand down the other.
‘You ain’t touching thachick.’
His boots whispered uncle all the way down the hall. I thought, She loves me, and it was the first time such a far-fetched idea had occurred to me. Her age was a
mystery, sinceshe didn’t possessa birth certificate. She would tellmeshe was born in 1909 or 1919, depending on howold shefeltat the moment. She was sureabout
the place:McClellanville, SouthCarolina, where her mama had woven sweet-grass basketsand sold themon theroadside.
‘Like meselling peaches,’ I’d said to her.
‘Not onething like you selling peaches,’ she’d said back.
‘You ain’t gotseven children you gottafeed fromit.’
‘You’ve gotsix brothersand sisters?’ I’d thought of herasalonein the world except for me.
‘I did have, but I don’t knowwherea one ofthemis.’
She’d thrown her husband out three yearsafter theymarried, forcarousing.
‘You put his brain in a bird, the bird would fly backward,’sheliked to say. I oftenwondered what that bird would do withRosaleen’s brain. I decided halfthetime
it would drop shit on your head and the other half it would sit on abandoned nests with its wings spread wide. I used to have daydreams in which she was white and
married T. Ray, and became my real mother. Other times I was a Negro orphan she found in a cornfield and adopted. Once in a while I had us living in a foreign
country like NewYork, whereshecould adoptmeand wecould both stay our naturalcolor. Mymother’s name was Deborah. I thought that was the prettiest nameI’d
ever heard, even though T. Ray refused to speak it. If I said it, he acted like he might go straight to the kitchen and stab something. Once when I asked himwhen her
birthdaywasand whatcake icing she preferred, he told me to shut up, and when Iasked hima second time, he picked up a jar of blackberry jelly and threw itagainst
the kitchen cabinet. We have blue stains to this day. I did manage to geta fewscraps ofinformation fromhim, though, such as mymother was buried inVirginia where
her peoplecamefrom. I got worked up at that, thinking I’d found a grandmother. No, hetells me, mymother wasan only child whose mother died agesago. Naturally.
Once when he stepped on a roach in the kitchen, he told me mymother had spent hours luring roaches out ofthe house with bits ofmarshmallow and trails of grahamcracker crumbs, that she was a lunatic when it came to saving bugs. The oddest things caused me to miss her. Like training bras. Who was I going to ask about that?
And who but mymother could’re understood the magnitude of drivingme to junior cheerleader tryouts? I can tell you for certain T. Ray didn’t grasp it. But you know
when I missed her the most? The day I was twelveand woke up with therose-petalstain onmy panties. I was so proud ofthat flowerand didn’t haveasoul to showit
to except Rosaleen. Not long after that I found a paper bag in the attic stapled at the top. Inside it I found the last traces ofmymother. There was a photograph ofa
woman smirking in front ofan old car, wearing a light-colored dress with padded shoulders. Her expression said, ‘Don’t you dare take this picture,’ but she wanted it
taken, you could seethat.You could not believethestories I sawin that picture, howshe was waiting at thecar fender for loveto cometo her, and not too patiently. I
laid the photograph beside my eighth-grade picture and examined every possible similarity. She was more or less missing a chin, too, but even so, she was aboveaverage pretty, which offered me genuine hope for my future. The bag contained a pair of white cotton gloves stained the color of age. When I pulled them out, I
thought, Her very hands were inside here. I feel foolish about it now, but one time I stuffed the gloves with cotton balls and held themthrough the night. The end-all
mystery insidethe bagwasasmallwooden picture ofMary, the mother ofJesus. I recognized hereven though her skinwas black, only ashadelighter thanRosaleen’s.
It looked to me like somebody had cut the black Mary’s picture froma book, glued it onto a sanded piece ofwood about two inches across, and varnished it. On the
back an unknown hand had written ‘Tiburon, S. C.’
For two years now I’d kept these things of hers inside a tin box, buried in the orchard. There was a special place out there in the long tunnel of trees no one knew
about, notevenRosaleen. I’d started going there beforeIcould tie my shoelaces. At first it was justaspot to hidefromT. Ray and his meanness or fromthe memory of
thatafternoonwhen the gunwent off, but later I would slip out there, sometimesafter T. Ray had goneto bed, just to lie under thetreesand be peaceful. It was my plot
ofearth, my cubbyhole. I’d placed her things inside the tin box and buried it out there late one night by flashlight, too scared to leave themhanging around inmy room,
even in the back ofa drawer. I was afraid T. Raymight go up to the attic and discover her things were missing, and turnmy roomupside down searching for them. I
hated to think what he’d do to me if he found themhidden amongmy stuff. Now and then I’d go out there and dig up the box. I would lie on the ground with the trees
folded over me, wearing her gloves, smiling at her photograph. I would study ‘Tiburon, S. C.’ on the back ofthe black Mary picture, thefunny slant ofthelettering, and
wonder what sort of place it was. I’d looked it up on the map once, and it wasn’t more than two hours away. Had my mother been there and bought this picture? I
always promised myself one day, when I was grown-up enough, I would take the bus over there. I wanted to go everyplace she had ever been. After mymorning of
capturing bees, I spent the afternoon in the peach stand out on the highway, selling T. Ray’s peaches. It was the loneliest summer job a girl could have, stuck in a
roadside hut with three walls and a flat tin roof. I sat on a Coke crate and watched pickups zoom by till I was nearly poisoned with exhaust fumes and boredom.
Thursday afternoons were usually a big peach day, with women getting ready for Sunday cobblers, but not a soulstopped. T. Ray refused to let me bring books out
here and read, and if I smuggled one out, say, Lost Horizon, stuck under my shirt, somebody, like Mrs. Watson fromthe next farm, would see himat church and say,
‘Sawyour girlin the peach stand reading up astorm. Youmust be proud.’
And he would half killme. What kind of person is against reading? I think he believed it would stir up ideas ofcollege, which he thoughta waste ofmoney for girls,
even if they did, like me, score the highest number a human being can get on their verbalaptitude test. Math aptitude is another thing, but people aren’t meant to be
overly bright in everything. I was the only student who didn’t groan and carry onwhen Mrs. Henry assigned us another Shakespeare play. Wellactually, I did pretend
to groan, but inside I was as thrilled as if I’d been crowned Sylvan’s Peach Queen. Up until Mrs. Henry came along, I’d believed beauty college would be the upper
limit ofmy career. Once, studying her face, I told her ifshe was my customer, I would give hera French twist that would do wonders for her, ad shesaid—and I quote —‘Please, Lily, you areinsulting your fineintelligence. Do you haveany idea howsmart you are?You could bea professor ora writer with actual books to yourcredit.
Beauty school. Please.’
It took me a month to get over the shock of having life possibilities. You know how adults love to ask, ‘So…whatare you going to be when you grow up?’I can’t
tell you how much I’d hated that question, but suddenly I was going around volunteering to people, people who didn’t even want to know, that I planned to be a
professorand a writer ofactual books. I keptacollection ofmywritings. Fora whileeverything I wrote had a horsein it.After weread RalphWaldo Emerson in class,
I wrote ‘My Philosophy of Life,’which I intended for the start ofa book but could get only three pages out of it. Mrs. Henry said I needed to live past fourteen years
old beforeI would havea philosophy. Shesaid ascholarship was my only hopeforafutureand lent me her private books for thesummer. Whenever I opened one, T.
Ray said, ‘Who do you think you are, Julius Shakespeare?’The man sincerely thought that was Shakespeare’s first name, and if you think I should havecorrected him,
you are ignorant about the art of survival. He also referred to me as Miss Brown-Nose-in a-Book and occasionally as Miss Emily-Big-Head-Diction. He meant
Dickinson, butagain, there are things you let go by. Without books in the peach stand, I often passed the time making up poems, but that slow afternoon I didn’t have
the patience for rhyming words. I just sat out there and thought about how much I hated the peach stand, how completely and solutely I hated it. The day before I’d
gone to first grade, T. Ray had found me in the peach stand sticking a nail into one of his peaches. He walked toward me with his thumbs jammed into his pocketsand
hiseyes squinted halfshut fromthe glare. I watched his shadowslide over the dirtand weedsand thought he had cometo punishmefor stabbing a peach. I didn’teven
knowwhy I was doing it. Instead hesaid, ‘Lily, you’restarting schooltomorrow, so therearethings you need to know. About your mother.’
For a moment everything got stilland quiet, as if the wind had died and the birds had stopped flying. When he squatted down in front ofme, I felt caught in a hot
dark Icould not break free of.
‘It’s time you knewwhat happened to her,and I want you to hear it fromme. Not frompeople out theretalking.’ We had never spoken of this, and I felt a shiver pass over me. The memory of that daywould come back to me at odd moments. The stuck window. The smell of
her. The clink of hangers. The suitcase. The way they’d fought and shouted. Most ofall the gun on the floor, the heaviness when I’d lifted it. I knew that the explosion
I’d heard that day had killed her. The sound stillsneaked into my head once in a while and surprised me. Sometimes it seemed that when I’d held the gun there hadn’t
been any noise at all, that it had come later, but other times, sitting alone on the back steps, bored and wishing for something to do, or pent up inmy roomon a rainy
day, I felt I had caused it, that when I’d lifted the gun, thesound had torn through theroomand gouged out our hearts. It wasasecret knowledgethat would slip up and
overwhelmme, and I would take offrunning—even ifit was raining out, I ran—straight down the hill to my special placein the peach orchard. I’d lieright down on the
ground and it would calmme. Now, T. Ray scooped up a handful of dirtand let iffall out of his hands.
‘The day she died, she was cleaning out the closet,’ he said. I could not account for the strange tone of his voice, an unnaturalsound, how it was almost, but not
quite, kind.
Cleaning thecloset. I had neverconsidered whatshe was doing thoselastminutes of her life, why she was in thecloset, what they had foughtabout.
‘I remember,’ I said. My voice sounded smalland faraway to me, like it was coming froman ant hole in the ground. His eyebrows lifted, and he brought his face
closer to me. Only hiseyes showed confusion.
‘Youwhat?’
‘I remember,’ I said again.
‘Youwere yelling ateach other.’
Atightening cameinto his face.
‘Is that right?’ hesaid. His lips had started to turn pale, whichwas thething Ialways watched for. I took astep backward.
‘Goddamn it, youwerefour years old!’ heshouted.
‘You don’t knowwhat you remember.’
In thesilencethat followed, Iconsidered lying to him, saying, I takeit back. I don’t rememberanything. Tellme what happened, but there was such a powerful need
inme, pent up for so long, to speak about it, to say the words. I looked down atmy shoes,at the nailI’d dropped when I’d seen himcoming.
‘There wasa gun.’
‘Christ,’ he said. He looked at me a long time, then walked over to the bushel baskets stacked at the back of the stand. He stood there a minute with his hands
balled up before heturned around and came back.
‘Whatelse?’ hesaid.
‘You tellmeright nowwhat you know.’
‘The gunwas on thefloor—’
‘And you picked it up,’ hesaid.
‘I guess you remember that.’
Theexploding sound had started to echo around inmy head. I looked offin the direction ofthe orchard, wanting to break and run.
‘I remember picking it up,’ I said.
‘But that’sall.’
Heleaned down and held me by theshoulders, gave mealittleshake.
‘You don’t rememberanything else? You’resure? Now, think.’
I paused so long hecocked his head, looking atme, suspicious.
‘No, sir, that’sall.’
‘Listen to me,’ hesaid, his fingers squeezing into my arms.
‘We were arguing like you said. We didn’t see you at first. Then we turned around and you were standing there holding the gun. You’d picked it up off the floor.
Then it just went off.’
Helet me go and rammed his hands into his pockets. Icould hear his hands jingling keysand nickelsand pennies. I wanted so much to grab on to his leg, to feel him
reach down and liftmeto hischest, but Icouldn’tmove,and neither did he. Hestared ata place over my head. Aplace he was being very carefulto study.
‘The policeasked lots of questions, but it was just one ofthoseterriblethings. You didn’tmean to do it,’ hesaid softly.
‘But ifanybodywants to know, that’s what happened.’
Then heleft, walking back toward the house. He’d gone only alittle waywhen helooked back.
‘And don’tstick that nailinto my peachesagain.’
It wasafter 6:00 PM when I wandered back to the housefromthe peach stand, having sold nothing, not one peach, and found Rosa- leen in theliving room. Usually
she would’ve gone home by now, but she was wrestlingwith therabbitears on top ofthe TV, trying to fix thesnowon thescreen. President Johnson faded in and out,
lost in the blizzard. I’d never seenRosaleen so interested in a TVshowthatshe would exert physicalenergy over it.
‘What happened?’ Iasked.
‘Did they drop theatombomb?’
Ever since we’d started bomb drills at school, I couldn’t help thinking my days were numbered. Everybody was putting fallout shelters in their backyards, canning
tap water, getting ready for the end of time. Thirteen students inmy class made fallout shelter models for their science project, which shows it was not just me worried
about it. We were obsessed withMr. Khrushchev and his missiles.
‘No, the bomb hasn’t gone off,’ shesaid.
‘Justcome hereand seeif you can fix the TV.’
Her fists were burrowed so deep into her hips they seemed to disappear. I twisted tin foilaround the antennae. Things cleared up enough to make out President
Johnson taking his seatata desk, peopleallaround. I didn’tcare much for the president because ofthe way he held his beagles by theears. I did admire his wife, Lady
Bird, though, who always looked like she wanted nothingmore than to sprout wings and fly away. Rosaleen dragged the footstool in front of the set and sat down, so
the wholething vanished under her. Sheleaned toward theset, holding a piece of her skirtand winding itaround in her hands.
‘What is going on?’I said, but she was so caught up inwhatever was happening she didn’teven answer me. On thescreen the president signed his name on a piece
of paper, using about ten ink pens to get it done.
‘Rosaleen—’
‘Shhh,’ shesaid, waving her hand. I had to get the news fromthe TVman.
‘Today, July second, 1964,’ hesaid, ‘the president ofthe United States signed the CivilRights Act into lawin the East Roomofthe White House.’
I looked overat Rosaleen, who sat thereshaking her head, mumbling, ‘Lord have mercy,’just looking so disbelieving and happy, like people on televisionwhen they
answered the $64,000 Question. I didn’t know whether to be excited for her or worried. All I I people ever talked about after churchwere the Negroes and whether
they’d get their civil rights. Who was winning—the white people’s team or the colored people’s team? Like it was a do-or-die contest. When that minister from
Alabama, Reverend Martin Luther King, got arrested last month in Florida for wanting to eat in a restaurant, the men at church acted like the white people’s teamhad
won the pennant race. I knewtheywould not takethis news lying down, not in one million years.
‘Hallelujah, Jesus,’ Rosaleenwas saying over there on her stool. Oblivious. Rosaleen had left dinner on the stove top, her famous smothered chicken. As I fixed T.
Ray’s plate, Iconsidered howto bring up the delicate matter ofmy birthday, something T. Ray had never paid attention to in all the years ofmy life, butevery year, like
a dope, I got my hopes up thinking this year would be the one. I had the same birthday as the country, whichmade it even harder to get noticed. When I was little, I
thought people weresending up rocketsand cherry bombs because ofme—hurray, Lilywas born! Then reality set in, likeitalways did. I wanted to tellT. Ray thatany
girlwould loveasilvercharmbracelet, that in fact last year I’d been the only girlat Sylvan Junior Highwithout one, that the whole point oflunchtime was to stand in the
cafeterialinejangling your wrist, giving peoplea guided tour of yourcharmcollection.
‘So,’ I said, sliding his platein front of him, ‘my birthday is this Saturday.’
I watched himpullthechickenmeat fromaround the bone with his fork.
‘I was just thinking I would loveto have one ofthosesilvercharmbracelets they have down at the mercantile.’
The house creaked like it did once in a while. Outside the door Snout gave a low bark, and then the air grew so quiet I could hear the food being ground up in T.
Ray’s mouth. He ate his chicken breast and started on the thigh, looking at me now and then in his hard way. I started to say, So then, what about the bracelet? but I
could see he’d already given his answer, and it caused a kind ofsorrow to rise inme that felt fresh and tender and had nothing, really, to do with the bracelet. I think
now it was sorrow for the sound of his fork scraping the plate, the way it swelled in the distance between us, how I was not even in the room. That night I lay in bed
listening to the flicks and twitters and thrums inside the bee jar, waiting till it was late enough so I could slip out to the orchard and dig up the tin box that held my
mother’s things. I wanted to lie down in the orchard and let it hold me. When the darkness had pulled the moon to thetop ofthesky, I got out of bed, put onmy shorts
and sleeveless blouse, and glided past T. Ray’s roomin silence, slidingmy armsand legs likeaskater on ice. I didn’t see his boots, howhe’d parked themin the middle
ofthe hall. When I fell, the clatter startled the air so badly T. Ray’s snore changed rhythm. At first itceased altogether, but then the snore started back with three piglet
snorts. I crept down the stairs, through the kitchen. When the night hit my face, I felt like laughing. The moon was a perfect circle, so full of light that all the edges of
things had an amber cast. The cicadas rose up, and I ran with bare feet across the grass. To reachmy spot I had to go to the eighth row left of the tractor shed, then
walk along it, counting trees tillI got to thirty-two. The tin boxwas buried in the soft dirt beneath the tree, shallow enough that Icould dig it up withmy hands. When I
brushed the dirt fromthelid and opened it, I sawfirst the whiteness of her gloves, then the photographwrapped inwaxed paper, justas I’d left it.And finally thefunny
wooden picture ofMarywith the dark face. I took everything out, and, stretching outamong the fallen peaches, I rested themacross my abdomen. When I looked up
through the web of trees, the night fell over me, and for a moment I lost my boundaries, feeling like the sky was my own skin and the moon was my heart beating up
there in the dark. Lightning came, not jagged but in soft, golden licks across the sky. I undid the buttons onmy shirtand opened it wide, just wanting the night to settle
onmy skin, and that’s how I fellasleep, lying there withmymother’s things, with the air makingmoisture onmy chest and the sky puckering with light. I woke to the
sound ofsomeonethrashing through thetrees. T. Ray! I sat up, panicked, buttoningmy shirt. I heard his footsteps, thefast, heavy pant of his breathing. Looking down,
I saw my mother’s gloves and the two pictures. I stopped buttoning and grabbed themup, fumbling with them, unable to think what to do, how to hide them. I had
dropped thetin box back in its hole, too faraway to reach.
‘Lileeee!’ heshouted, and I sawhis shadowplungetoward meacross the ground. I jammed the glovesand pictures under the waistband ofmy shorts, then reached
for the rest of the buttons with shaking fingers. Before I could fasten them, light poured down on me and there he was without a shirt, holding a flashlight. The beam
sweptand zagged, blindingme when itswung across my eyes.
‘Who were you out here with?’ heshouted,aiming thelight onmy half-buttoned top.
‘n-no one,’ I said, gathering my knees in my arms, startled by what he was thinking. I couldn’t look long at his face, how large and blazing it was, like the face of
God. Heflung the beamoflight into the darkness.
‘Who’s out there?’ he yelled.
‘Please, T. Ray, no one was here butme.’
‘Get up fromthere,’ he yelled. I followed himback to the house. His feet struck the ground so hard I felt sorry for the black earth. He didn’t speak tillwe reached
the kitchen and he pulled the Martha White grits fromthe pantry.
‘Iexpect this out of boys, Lily—you can’t blamethem—but Iexpectmore out of you. You act no better than aslut.’
He poured a mound of grits thesize ofan anthill onto the pinefloor.
‘Get over hereand kneel down.’
I’d been kneeling on grits since I was six, but still I never got used to that powdered-glass feeling beneath my skin. I walked toward themwith those tiny feather
steps you expect ofa girl in Japan, and lowered myself to the floor, determined not to cry, but the sting was already gathering in my eyes. T. Ray sat in a chair and
cleaned his nails with a pocketknife. I swayed fromknee to knee, hoping for a second or two of relief, but the pain cut deep into my skin. I bit down onmy lip, and it
was then I felt the wooden picture of black Mary underneath my waistband. I felt the waxed paper with my mother’s picture inside and her gloves stuck to my belly,
and it seemed all ofasudden like mymother was there, up against my body, likeshe was bitsand pieces ofinsulationmolded against my skin, helpingmeabsorb all his
meanness. The next morning I woke up late. The moment my feet touched the floor, I checked under my mattress where I’d tucked my mother’s things—just a
temporary hiding place till I could bury them back in the orchard. Satisfied they were safe, I strolled into the kitchen, where I found Rosaleen sweeping up grits. I
buttered a piece ofSunbeambread. Shejerked the broomas sheswept, raising a wind.
‘What happened?’ shesaid.
‘I went out to the orchard last night. T. Ray thinks I metsome boy.’
‘Did you?’
I rolled my eyesat her.
‘No.’
‘Howlong did he keep you on these grits?’
I shrugged.
‘Maybean hour.’
Shelooked down atmy kneesand stopped sweeping. Theywereswollenwith hundreds ofred welts, pinprick bruises that would growinto a bluestubbleacross my
skin.
‘Look at you, child. Look what he’s doneto you,’shesaid. My knees had been tortured likethisenough times inmy life that I’d stopped thinking ofitas out ofthe
ordinary; it was just something you had to put up with fromtime to time, like the common cold. But suddenly the look on Rosaleen’s face cut through all that. Look
what he’s doneto you. That’s what I was doing—taking a good long look atmy knees—whenT. Ray stomped through the back door.
‘Well, look who decided to get up.’
He yanked the bread out ofmy handsand threwit into Snout’s food bowl.
‘Would it betoo much to ask you to get out to the peach stand and do some work? You’re not Queen fora Day, you know.’
This willsound crazy, but up until then I thought T. Ray probably loved mesome. Icould never forget thetime hesmiled at mein churchwhen I was singingwith the
hymnbook upside down. NowI looked at his face. It was despising and full ofanger.
‘As long as you live under my roof, you’ll do what I say!’ heshouted. Then I’llfind another roof, I thought.
‘You understand me?’ hesaid.
‘Yes, sir, I understand,’I said, and I did, too. I understood thata newrooftop would do wonders for me. Latethatafternoon Icaught two more bees. Lying onmy
stomach across the bed, I watched howthey orbited thespacein thejar,around and around likethey’d missed theexit. Rosaleen poked her head in the door.
‘You allright?’
‘Yeah, I’mfine.’
‘I’mleaving now. You tell your daddy I’mgoing into town tomorrowinstead ofcoming here.’
‘You’re going to town? Take me,’ I said.
‘Why do youwanna go?’
‘Please, Rosaleen.’
‘You’re gonna haveto walk the whole way.’
‘I don’tcare.’
‘Ain’t nothingmuch gonna be open but firecracker standsand the grocery store.’
‘I don’tcare. I just wanna get out ofthe housesome onmy birthday.’
Rosaleen stared atme, sagged lowon her big ankles.
‘Allright, but you ask your daddy. I’ll be by herefirst thing in the morning.’
She was out the door. Icalled after her.
‘Howcome you’re going to town?’
She stayed with her back to me a moment, unmoving. When she turned, her face looked soft and changed, like a different Rosaleen. Her hand dipped into her
pocket, where her fingers crawled around for something. She drew out a folded piece of notebook paper and came to sit beside me on the bed. I rubbed my knees
while she smoothed out the paperacross her lap. Her name, RosaleenDaise, was written twenty-five timesat least down the page in large, carefulcursive, like the first
paper you turn inwhen schoolstarts.
‘This is my practicesheet,’ shesaid.
‘For the Fourth ofJuly they’re holding a voters’ rally at thecolored church. I’mregisteringmyselfto vote.’
An uneasy feeling settled in my stomach. Last night the television had said a man in Mississippi was killed for registering to vote, and I myself had overheard Mr.
Bussey, one ofthe deacons, say to T. Ray, ‘Don’t youworry, they’re gonna make‘emwritetheir names in perfectcursiveand refusethemacard ifthey forgetso much
as to dotan i or makealoop in their you.’
I studied thecurves ofRosaleen’s R.
‘Does T. Ray knowwhat you’re doing?’
‘T. Ray,’ shesaid.
‘T. Ray don’t knownothing.’
Atsunset heshuffled up, sweaty fromwork. I met himat the kitchen door, my arms folded across thefront ofmy blouse.
‘I thought I’d walk to townwithRosaleen tomorrow. I need to buy somesanitary supplies.’
He accepted this without comment. T. Ray hated female puberty worse than anything. That night I looked at the jar of bees on my dresser. The poor creatures
perched on the bottombarelymoving, obviously pining away for flight. I remembered then the way they’d slipped fromthe cracks inmy walls and flown for the sheer
joy of it. I thought about the way my mother had built trails of graham-cracker crumbs and marshmallow to lure roaches fromthe house rather than step on them. I
doubted she would’veapproved of keeping bees in ajar. I unscrewed thelid and set itaside.
‘You can go,’I said. But the bees remained there, like planes on arunway not knowing they’d been cleared for takeoff. They crawled on their stalk legsaround the
curved perimeters ofthe glassas ifthe world had shrunk to that jar. I tapped the glass, even laid thejar on its side, but thosecrazy bees stayed put. The bees werestill
in therethe nextmorningwhenRosaleen showed up. She was bearing an angelfood cake with fourteen candles.
‘Here you go. Happy birthday,’shesaid. Wesat down and atetwo sliceseachwith glasses ofmilk. The milk lefta moon crescent on the darkness of her upper lip,
which she didn’t bother to wipe away. Later I would remember that, how she set out, a marked woman fromthe beginning. Sylvanwas miles away. We walked along
theledge ofthe highway, Rosaleenmoving at the pace ofa bank-vault door, her spit jug fastened on her finger. Haze hung under thetrees, and every inch ofair smelled
overripe with peaches.
‘You limping?’ Rosaleen said. My knees wereaching to the point that I was struggling to keep up with her.
‘Alittle.’
‘Well, why don’t wesit down on theside oftheroad awhile?’ shesaid.
‘That’s okay,’ I told her.
‘I’ll befine.’
A car swept by, slinging scalded air and a layer of dust. Rosaleen was slick with heat. She mopped her face and breathed hard. We were coming to Ebenezer
Baptist Church, where T. Ray and Iattended. Thesteeplejutted through acluster ofshadetrees; below, thered bricks looked shadowy and cool.
‘Come on,’ I said, turning in the drive.
‘Where’re you going?’
‘Wecan rest in thechurch.’
The air inside was dimand still, slanted with light fromthe side windows, not those pretty stained-glass windows but milky panes you can’t really see through. I led
us down frontand sat in thesecond pew, leaving roomfor Rosaleen. She plucked a paper fan fromthe hymnbook holderand studied the picture on it—a whitechurch
with a smilingwhite lady coming out the door. Rosaleen fanned and I listened to little jets ofaircome off her hands. She never went to church herself, but on those few
times T. Ray had let me walk to her house back in the woods, I’d seen her specialshelfwith a stub ofcandle, creek rocks, a reddish feather, and a piece ofJohn the
Conqueror root, and right in the center a picture ofa woman, propped up without a frame. The first time I saw it, I’d asked Rosaleen, ‘Is that you?’since I swear the
woman looked exactly like her, withwoolly braids, blue-black skin, narroweyes,and most of herconcentrated in her lower portion, likean eggplant.
‘This is mymama,’she said. The finish was rubbed off the sides of the picture where her thumbs had held it. Her shelf had to do with a religion she’d made up for
herself, a mixture of nature and ancestor worship. She’d stopped going to the House of Prayer FullGospelHoliness Church years ago because it started at ten in the
morning and didn’t end till three in the afternoon, which is enough religion to killa full-grown person, she’d said. T. Ray said Rosaleen’s religionwas plainwacko, and
for meto stay out ofit. But it drewmeto her to think sheloved water rocksand woodpecker feathers, that she had asingle picture of her mother just likeI did. One of
thechurch doors opened and Brother Gerald, our minister, stepped into thesanctuary.
‘Well, for goodness’ sake, Lily, whatare you doing here?’
Then hesawRosaleen and started to rub the bald space on his head with such agitation I thought he might rub down to theskull bone.
‘We were walking to town and stopped in to cool off.’
His mouth formed the word ‘oh,’ but he didn’t actually say it; he was too busy looking at Rosaleen in his church, Rosaleen who chose this moment to spit into her
snuffjug. It’s funny how you forget the rules. She was not supposed to be inside here. Every time a rumor got going abouta group ofNegroescoming to worship with
us on Sundaymorning, the deacons stood locked-arms across the church steps to turn themaway. We loved themin the Lord, Brother Gerald said, but they had their
own places.
‘Today’s my birthday,’ I said, hoping to send his thoughts in a newdirection.
‘Is it? Well, happy birthday, Lily. So howold are you now?’
‘Fourteen.’
‘Ask himifwecan haveacouple ofthesefans for your birthday present,’ said Rosaleen. He madeathin sound, intended foralaugh.
‘Now, ifweleteverybody borrowafan that wanted one, thechurchwouldn’t haveafan left.’
‘She was just kidding,’I said, and stood up. Hesmiled, satisfied, and walked beside meall the way to the door, withRosaleen tagging behind. Outside, thesky had
whited over with clouds, and shine spilled across the surfaces, sending motes before my eyes. When we’d cut through the parsonage yard and were back on the
highway, Rosaleen produced two church fans fromthe bosomof her dress, and, doing an impersonation ofme gazing up sweet-faced, she said, ‘Oh, Brother Gerald,
she was just kidding.’ We came into Sylvan on the worst side of town. Old houses set up on cinder blocks. Fans wedged in the windows. Dirt yards. Women in pink curlers. Collarless
dogs.
After a few blocks we approached the Esso station on the corner of West Market and Park Street, generally recognized as a catchall place for menwith too much
time on their hands. I noticed that not a single car was getting gas. Three men sat in dinette chairs beside the garage with a piece of plywood balanced on their knees.
Theywere playing cards.
‘Hit me,’ one of themsaid, and the dealer, who wore a Seed and Feed cap, slapped a card down in front of him. He looked up and saw us, Rosaleen fanning and
shuffling, swaying sideto side.
‘Well, look what we gotcoming here,’ hecalled out.
‘Where’re you going, nigger?’
Firecrackers madeaspattering sound in the distance.
‘Keep walking,’ I whispered.
‘Don’t pay any attention.’
But Rosaleen, who had less sensethan I’d dreamed, said in this tonelikeshe wasexplaining something real hard to a kindergarten student, ‘I’mgoing to register my
nameso Ican vote, that’s what.’
‘We should hurry on,’I said, but she kept walking at her own slow pace. The man next to the dealer, with haircombed straight back, put down his cards and said,
‘Did you hear that? We got ourselvesa modelcitizen.’
I heard a slow song ofwind drift ever so slightly in the street behind us and move along the gutter. We walked, and the men pushed back their makeshift table and
cameright down to thecurb to wait for us, liketheywerespectatorsata paradeand we werethe prizefloat.
‘Did you ever see onethat black?’ said the dealer. And the manwith hiscombed-back hair said, ‘No,and Iain’tseen onethat big either.’
Naturally the third man felt obliged to say something, so he looked at Rosaleen sashaying along unperturbed, holding her white-lady fan, and he said, ‘Where’d you
get that fan, nigger?’
‘Stoleit fromachurch,’ shesaid. Just likethat. I had gone oncein araft down the Chattooga River withmy church group,and thesamefeeling cameto me now—of
being lifted by currents, by a swirl ofevents I couldn’t reverse. Coming alongside the men, Rosaleen lifted her snuff jug, which was filled with black spit, and calmly
poured it across the tops of the men’s shoes, moving her hand in little loops like she was writing her name—Rosaleen Daise—just the way she’d practiced. For a
second they stared down at the juice, dribbled like car oilacross their shoes. They blinked, trying to make it register. When they looked up, I watched their faces go
fromsurprise to anger, then outright fury. They lunged at her, and everything started to spin. There was Rosaleen, grabbed and thrashing side to side, swinging the men
like pocketbooks on herarms,and the men yelling for her to apologizeand clean their shoes.
‘Clean it off!’ That’s all I could hear, over and over. And then the cry of birds overhead, sharp as needles, sweeping fromlowbough trees, stirring up the scent of
pine,and even then I knewI would recoilallmy lifefromthesmell ofit.
‘Callthe police,’ yelled the dealer to a man inside. By thenRosaleen lay sprawled on the ground, pinned, twisting her fingersaround clumps of grass. Blood ran from
acut beneath hereye. Itcurved under herchin the way tears do. When the policeman got there, hesaid we had to get into the back of hiscar.
‘You’re underarrest,’ hetold Rosaleen.
‘Assault, theft,and disturbing the peace.’
Then hesaid to me, ‘Whenwe get down to thestation, I’llcall your daddy and let himdealwith you.’
Rosaleen climbed in, sliding over on the seat. I moved after her, sliding as she slid, sitting as she sat. The doorclosed. So quiet itamounted to nothing buta snap of
air,and that was thestrangeness ofit, howasmallsound likethatcould fallacross the whole world.
T
Chapter Two
On leaving the old nest, the swarm normally flies only a few metres and settles. Scout bees look for a suitable place to start the new colony. Eventually, one
locationwins favorand the wholeswarmtakes to theair. —Bees ofthe World
HE PO-LICEMAN driving us to jailwas Mr. AveryGaston, but men at the Esso station called himShoe. Apuzzling nickname since there was nothing remarkable
about his shoes, oreven his feet so faras Icould see. The onething about himwas thesmallness of hisears, theears ofachild, ears likelittle dried apricots. I fixed
my eyes on themfromthe backseatand wondered why he wasn’tcalled Ears. Thethree men followed us in a green pickup with a gun rack inside. They drovecloseto
our bumperand blewthe horn every fewseconds. I jumped each time, and Rosaleen gave my leg a pat. In front ofthe WesternAuto the men started a game of pulling
alongside us and yelling things out the window, mostly things we couldn’t make out because our windows were rolled up. People in the back of police cars were not
given the benefit of door handles or windowcranks, I noticed, so we were blessed to bechauffeured to jail in smothering heat, watching the menmouth things we were
glad not to know. Rosaleen looked straightahead and acted as ifthe menwereinsignificant houseflies buzzing at our screen door. I was the only one who could feel the
way her thighs trembled, the whole back seat likea vibrating bed.
‘Mr. Gaston,’ I said, ‘those men aren’tcomingwith us,arethey?’
His smileappeared in therearviewmirror.
‘Ican’tsaywhatmen riled up likethat will do.’
Before Main Street they tired oftheamusementand sped off. I breathed easier, but whenwe pulled into theempty lot behind the policestation, theywere waiting on
the back steps. The dealer tapped a flashlight against the palmof his hand. The other two held our church fans, waving themback and forth. When we got out of the
car, Mr. Gaston put handcuffs on Rosaleen, fastening her arms behind her back. I walked so close to her I felt heat vapor trailing off her skin. She stopped ten yards
short ofthe men and refused to budge.
‘Now, look here, don’t make me get out my gun,’Mr. Gaston said. Usually the only time the police in Sylvan got to use their guns was when they gotcalled out to
shoot rattlesnakes in people’s yards.
‘Come on, Rosaleen,’ I said.
‘Whatcan they do to youwith a policeman right here?’
That was when the dealer lifted the flashlight over his head, then down, smashing it into Rosaleen’s forehead. She dropped to her knees. I don’t remember
screaming, but the next thing I knew, Mr. Gaston had his hand clamped over mymouth.
‘Hush,’ hesaid.
‘Maybe now you feel like apologizing,’ the dealer said. Rosaleen tried to get to her feet, but without her hands it was hopeless. It took me and Mr. Gaston both to
pull her up.
‘Your black ass is gonnaapologize one way oranother,’ the dealer said,and hestepped toward Rosaleen.
‘Hold on now, Franklin,’ said Mr. Gaston, moving us toward the door.
‘Now’s not thetime.’
‘I’mnot resting tillsheapologizes.’
That’s thelast I heard himyell before we got inside, whereI had an overpowering impulseto kneel down and kiss thejail housefloor. The only imageI had for jails
was fromwesterns at the movies, and this one was nothing like that. For one thing, it was painted pink and had flower-printcurtains in the window. It turned out we’d
comein through thejailer’s living quarters. His wifestepped in fromthe kitchen, greasing a muffin tin.
‘Got you two more mouths to feed,’Mr. Gaston said, and she went back to work withoutasmile ofsympathy. Heled usaround to thefront, wherethere weretwo
rows of jailcells, all of themempty. Mr. Gaston removed Rosaleen’s handcuffs and handed her a towel fromthe bathroom. She pressed it against her head while he
filled out papers ata desk, followed by a period of poking around for keys in a file drawer. The jailcells smelled with the breath of drunk people. He put us in the first
cell on the first row, where somebody had scratched the words ‘Shit Throne’across a bench attached to one wall. Nothing seemed quite real. We’re in jail, I thought. We’rein jail. WhenRosaleen pulled back thetowel, I sawan inch-long gash acrossa puffy place high over hereyebrow.
‘Is it hurting bad?’ Iasked.
‘Some,’ shesaid. Shecircled thecelltwo or threetimes beforesinking down onto the bench.
‘T. Raywill get us out,’ I said.
‘Uh-huh.’
She didn’tspeak another word tillMr. Gaston opened thecell doorabouta half hour later.
‘Come on,’ hesaid. Rosaleen looked hopefulfora moment. Sheactually started to lift herself up. Heshook his head.
‘You ain’t going anywhere. Just the girl.’
At the door I held on to acell bar likeit was thelong boneinRosaleen’sarm.
‘I’ll be back. Allright?…Allright, Rosaleen?’
‘You go on, I’llmanage.’
The caved-in look of her face nearly did me in. The speedometer needle on T. Ray’s truck wiggled so badly I couldn’t make out whether it pointed to seventy or
eighty. Leaning into the steering wheel, he jammed his foot onto the accelerator, let off, then jammed it again. The poor truck was rattling to the point I expected the
hood to fly offand decapitateacouple of pinetrees. I imagined that T. Raywas rushing homeso hecould start rightaway constructing pyramids of gritsall through the
house—a torture chamber of food staples, where I would go fromone pile to the next, kneeling for hours on end with nothing but bathroombreaks. I didn’t care. I
couldn’t think ofanything but Rosaleen back therein jail. I squinted at himsideways.
‘Whatabout Rosaleen? You haveto get her out—was ‘You’relucky I got you out!’ he yelled.
‘Butshecan’tstay there—’
‘She dumped snuffjuice on three white men! What the hellwas she thinking?And on Franklin Posey, for Christ’s sake. She couldn’t pick somebody normal? He’s
the meanest nigger-hater in Sylvan. He’d as soon kill heras look at her.’
‘But not really,’ I said.
‘You don’tmean he would really kill her.’
‘What I mean is, I wouldn’t besurprised if heflat-out killed her.’
My arms felt weak in their sockets. Franklin Poseywas the manwith theflashlight, and he was gonna killRosaleen. But then, hadn’t I known this insideeven before
T. Ray ever said it? Hefollowed me up thestairs. I moved with deliberateslowness, anger suddenly building inme. Howcould heleave Rosa- leen in jaillikethat?As I
stepped inside my room, hestopped at the doorway.
‘I haveto go settlethe payrollfor the pickers,’ hesaid.
‘Don’t you leavethis room. You understand me? You sit hereand think aboutmecoming back and dealingwith you. Think about it real hard.’
‘You don’tscare me,’ I said, mostly under my breath. He’d already turned to leave, but nowhe whirled back.
‘What did you say?’
‘You don’t scare me,’ I repeated, louder this time. Abrazen feeling had broken loose inme, a daring something that had been locked up inmy chest. He stepped
toward me, raising the back of his hand like he might bring it down across my face.
‘You better watch your mouth.’
‘Go ahead, try and hitme!’ I yelled. When heswung, I turned my face. It wasacleanmiss. I ran for the bed and scrambled onto the middle ofit, breathing hard.
‘Mymother will never let you touchmeagain!’ I shouted.
‘Your mother?’
His face was bright red.
‘You think that god damnwoman gaveashitabout you?’
‘Mymother loved me!’ Icried. Hethrewback his head and let outaforced, bitter laugh.
‘It’s—it’s not funny,’ I said. He lunged toward the bed then, pressing his fists into the mattress, bringing his face so close I could see the tiny holes where his
whiskers grew. I slid backward, toward the pillows, shovingmy back into the headboard.
‘Not funny?’ he yelled.
‘Not funny? Why, it’s thefunniest goddamn thing Iever heard: you thinking your mother is your guardian angel.’
Helaughed again.
‘The woman could havecared lessabout you.’
‘That’s not true,’ I said.
‘It’s not.’
‘And howwould you know?’ hesaid, stillleaning toward me. Aleftover smile pulled thecorners of his mouth.
‘I hate you!’ I screamed. Thatstopped his smiling instantly. Hestiffened.
‘Why, you little bitch,’ he said. The color faded fromhis lips. Suddenly I felt ice cold, as if something dangerous had slipped into the room. I looked toward the
windowand feltatremor slidealongmy spine.
‘You listen to me,’ hesaid, his voice deadly calm.
‘Thetruth is, your sorrymother ran offand left you. The day she died, she’d come back to get her things, that’sall.You can hate meall youwant, but she’s the one
who left you.’
Theroomturned absolutely silent. He brushed at something on his shirtfront, thenwalked to the door.After heleft, I didn’t moveexcept to tracethe bars oflight on
the bed withmy finger. Thesound of his boots banging down thestairs drifted away, and I took the pillows fromunderneath the bedspread and placed themaround me
like I was making an inner tube that might keep me afloat. I could understand her leaving him. But leaving me? This would sink me forever. The bee jar sat on the
bedside table, empty now. Sometime since this morning the bees had finally gotten around to flying off. I reached over and took the jar inmy hands, and out came the
tears I’d been holding on to, it seemed like for years. Your sorrymother ran offand left you. The day she died, she’d come back to get her things, that’s all. God and
Jesus, you make him take it back. The memory settled over me. The suitcase on the floor. The way they’d fought. My shoulders began to shake in a strange,
controllable way. I held the jar pressed between my breasts, hoping it would steady me, but I couldn’t stop shaking, couldn’t stop crying, and it frightened me, as
though I’d been struck by a car I hadn’t seen coming and was lying on the side of the road, trying to understand what had happened. I sat on the edge of the bed,
replaying his words overand over. Each timethere wasa wrench inwhat felt like my heart. I don’t knowhowlong I sat therefeeling broken to pieces. I walked to the
window and gazed out at the peach trees stretching halfway to North Carolina, the way they held up their leafy arms in gestures of pure beseeching. The rest was sky
and airand lonely space. I looked down at the beejar stillclutched inmy hand and sawateaspoon ofteardrops floating in the bottom. I unfastened the windowscreen
and poured it out. The wind lifted it on her skirt tailsand shook it over the blistered grass. Howcould she haveleft me?I stood thereseveralminutes looking out on the
world, trying to understand. Little birds were singing, so perfect. That’s when it came to me: What ifmymother leavingwasn’t true? What if T. Ray had made it up to
punish me? I felt almost dizzy with relief. That was it. That had to be it. I mean, my father was Thomas Edison when it came to inventing punishments. Once after I’d
back-talked him, he’d told me my rabbit, Mademoiselle, had died, and I’d cried all night before I discovered her the next morning healthy as anything in her pen. He
had to be making this up, too. Some things were not possible in this world. Children did not have two parents who refused to love them. One, maybe, but for pity’s
sake, not two. It had to be like he’d said before: she was cleaning out the closet the day of the accident. People cleaned out closets all the time. I took a breath to
steadymyself. You could say I’d never had a true religious moment, the kind where you know yourselfspoken to by a voice that seems other than yourself, spoken to
so genuinely you see the words shining on trees and clouds. But I had such a moment right then, standing inmy own ordinary room. I heard a voice say, Lily Melissa
Owens, your jar is open. In a matter of seconds I knew exactly what I had to do—leave. I had to get away fromT. Ray, who was probably on his way back this
minuteto do Lord-knows-what to me. Not to mention I had to get Rosaleen out ofjail. Theclock read 2:40. I needed asolid plan, but I didn’t havetheluxury ofsitting
down to think one up. I grabbed my pink canvas duffel bag, the one I’d planned to use for overnights the minute anyone asked me. I took the thirty-eight dollars I’d
earned selling peaches and stuffed it into the bagwithmy seven best pairs of panties, the ones that had the days of the week printed across the backside. I dumped in
socks, five pairs of shorts, tops, a night gown, shampoo, brush, toothpaste, toothbrush, rubber bands for my hair, all the time watching the window. What else?
Catching sight of the map tacked on the wall, I snatched it down, not bothering to pry out the tacks. I reached under the mattress and pulled out mymother’s picture,
the gloves, and the wooden picture of black Mary, and tucked themdown in the bag, too. Tearing a sheet of paper fromlast year’s English notebook, I wrote a note,
shortand to the point:
Dear T. Ray,
Don’t bother looking for me.
Lily.
P. S. People who telllies like you should rot in hell.
When I checked the window, T. Ray was coming out of the orchard toward the house, fists balled, head plowed forward like a bull wanting to gore something. I
propped the note onmy dresserand stood a moment in thecenter oftheroom, wondering ifI’d ever seeitagain.
‘Goodbye,’ I said, and there was a tiny sprig ofsadness pushing up frommy heart. Outside, I spied the broken space in the latticework that wrapped around the
foundation ofthe house. Squeezing through, I disappeared into violet lightand cobwebbed air. T. Ray’s boots stomped across the porch.
‘Lily! Li-leeeee!’I heard his voicesailing along thefloorboards ofthe house.All ofasudden Icaught sight of Snout sniffing at thespot whereI’d crawled through. I
backed deeper into the darkness, but she’d caught my scent and started barking her mangy head off. T. Ray emerged with my note crumpled in his hand, yelled at
Snout to shut the hell up, and tore out in his truck, leaving plumes ofexhaust allalong the driveway. Walking along the weedy strip beside the highway for the second
timethat day, I was thinking howmuch older fourteen had made me. In thespace ofafewhours I’d becomeforty years old. Theroad stretched empty as faras Icould
see, with heat shimmer making the air seemwavy in places. If I managed to get Rosa- leen free—an ‘if’so big it could have been the planet Jupiter—just where did I
think we’d go? Suddenly I stood still. Tiburon, South Carolina. Ofcourse. The townwritten on the back ofthe black Mary picture. Hadn’t I been planning to go there
one of these days? It made such perfect sense: my mother had been there. Or else she knew people there who’d cared enough to send her a nice picture of Jesus’
mother. And who would ever think to look for us there?
I squatted beside the ditch and unfolded the map. Tiburon was a pencil dot beside the big red star of Columbia. T. Ray would check the bus station, so Rosaleen
and I would haveto hitchhike. Howhard could that be?You stand there with your thumb outand a person takes pity on you.Ashort distance past thechurch, Brother
Gerald whizzed by in his white Ford. I sawhis brakelights flicker. He backed up.
‘I thought that was you,’ hesaid through the window.
‘Where’re you headed?’
‘Town.’
‘Again? What’s the bag for?’
‘I’m…I’mtaking somethings to Rosaleen. She’s in jail.’
‘Yeah, I know,’ hesaid, flinging open the passenger door.
‘Get in, I’mheading there myself.’
I’d never been inside a preacher’s car before. It’s not that I expected a ton of Bibles stacked on the backseat, but I was surprised to see that, inside, it was like
anybody else’scar.
‘You’re going to see Rosaleen?’ I said.
‘The policecalled and asked meto presschargesagainst her for stealing church property. They say shetook some of our fans. You knowanything about that?’
‘It was only two fans—‘ Hejumped straight into his pulpit voice.
‘In the eyes ofGod it doesn’t matter whether it’s two fans or two hundred. Stealing is stealing. She asked ifshe could take the fans, I said no, in plain English. She
took themanyway. Nowthat’s sin, Lily.’
Pious people havealways gotten onmy nerves.
‘Butshe’s deafin oneear,’ I said.
‘I think shejustmixed up what you said. She’salways doing that. T. Raywilltell her, ‘Ironmy two shirts,’and she’lliron the blueshirts.’
‘Ahearing problem. Well, I didn’t knowthat,’ hesaid.
‘Rosaleenwould never stealathing.’
‘They said she’d assaulted some men at the Esso station.’
‘It wasn’t likethat,’ I said.
‘See, she was singing her favorite hymn, ‘Were you there when they crucified myLord?’
‘I don’t believethose men are Christians, Brother Gerald, becausethey yelled at her to shut up with that blankety-blank Jesus tune. Rosa- leen said, ‘You can curse
me, but don’t blasphemethe Lord Jesus.’
But they kept right on. So she poured thejuicefromher snuffcup on their shoes. Maybeshe was wrong, but in her mind she was standing up for Jesus.’
I was sweating through my top and allalong the backs of my thighs. Brother Gerald dragged his teeth back and forth across his lip. I could tell he was actually
weighing what I’d said. Mr. Gaston was in the station alone, eating boiled peanuts at his desk, when Brother Gerald and I came through the door. Being the sort of
person he was, Mr. Gaston had shellsall over thefloor.
‘Yourcolored woman ain’t here,’ hesaid, looking atme.
‘I took her to the hospitalfor stitches. Shetook afalland hit her head.’
Took afall, my rearend. I wanted to throwhis boiled peanutsagainst the wall. Icould not keep myselffromshouting at him.
‘What do youmean, shefelland hit her head?’
Mr. Gaston looked overat Brother Gerald, thatall-knowing look men giveeach other when afemaleacts theleast bit hysterical.
‘Settle down, now,’ hesaid to me.
‘Ican’tsettle down tillI knowifshe’sallright,’ I said, my voicecalmer butstillshaking alittle.
‘She’s fine. It’s only alittleconcussion. Iexpectshe’ll be back herelater thisevening. The doctor wanted her watched forafewhours.’ While Brother Gerald wasexplaining howhecouldn’t sign the warrant papers seeing as howRosaleenwas nearly deaf, I started for the door. Mr. Gaston shot mea
warning look.
‘We gota guard on herat the hospital,and he’s not letting anybody see her, so you go on back home. You understand?’
‘Yes, sir. I’mgoing home.’
‘You do that,’ hesaid. ’
‘CauseifI hear you’ve been anywhere near that hospital, I’mcalling your daddy again.’
Sylvan Memorial Hospital was a low brick building with one wing for whites and one for blacks. I stepped into a deserted corridor clogged with too many smells.
Carnations, old people, rubbing alcohol, bathroomdeodorizer, red Jell-O. Air conditioners poked out fromthe windows in the white section, but back here there was
nothing butelectric fans moving the hotair fromone place to another. At the nurses’station a policeman leaned on the desk. He looked like somebody just out of high
school, who’d flunked PE and hung out with the shop boys smoking at recess. He was talking to a girl inwhite. Anurse, I guess, but she didn’t look much older than I
was.
‘I get offat six o’clock,’ I heard himsay. She stood there smiling, tucking a piece of hair behind her ear. At the opposite end of the hallan empty chair sat outside
one oftherooms. It had a policeman’s hat underneath it. I hurried down thereto find asign on the door.
‘NO VISITORS. I went right in. There were six beds, allempty, except the farthest one over by the window. The sheets rose up, trying hard to accommodate the
occupant. I plopped my bag on thefloor.
‘Rosaleen?’
Agauze bandagethesize ofa baby’s diaper was wrapped around her head,and her wrists weretied to the bed railing. When shesawmestanding there, shestarted
to cry. In all the years she’d looked after me, I’d never seen a tear cross her face. Now the levee broke wide open. I patted her arm, her leg, her cheek, her hand. When her tear glands werefinally exhausted, I said, ‘What happened to you?’
‘After you left, that policeman called Shoelet those men comein for theirapology.’
‘They hit you again?’
‘Two ofthemheld me by thearms whilethe other one hitme—the one with theflashlight. Hesaid, ‘Nigger, you say you’resorry.’ When I didn’t, hecameatme. He hitmetillthe policeman said that wasenough. They didn’t get no apology, though.’
I wanted those men to diein hell begging for ice water, but I felt mad at Rosaleen, too. Why couldn’t you justapologize? Thenmaybe Franklin Poseywould let you
offwith justa beating. Allshe’d done was guaranteethey’d come back.
‘You’ve got to get out of here,’ I said, untying her wrists.
‘Ican’t just leave,’ shesaid.
‘I’mstillin jail.’
‘If you stay here, those men are gonna come back and kill you I’mserious. They’re gonna kill you, like those colored people in Mississippi got killed. Even T. Ray
said so.’ When shesat up, the hospital gown rode up her thighs. Shetugged it toward her knees, but it slid right back likea piece ofelastic. I found her dress in theclosetand
handed it to her.
‘This iscrazy—‘ shesaid.
‘Put on the dress. Just do it,allright?’
She pulled it over her head and stood there with the bandagesloped over her forehead.
‘That bandage has got to go,’I said. Ieased it offto find two rows ofcatgut stitches. Then, signaling her to be quiet, Icracked the door to seeifthe policemanwas
back at hischair. He was. Naturally it was too much to hope he’d stay offflirting long enough for us to float out of here. I stood thereacouple ofminutes, trying to think
up some kind ofscheme, then opened my bag, dug into my peachmoney,and took outacouple of dimes.
‘I’mgonnatry and get rid of him. Get in the bed, in case helooks in here.’
Shestared atme, hereyes shrunk to mere dots.
‘Baby Jesus,’ shesaid. When I stepped out into the hall, hejumped up.
‘Youweren’tsupposed to bein there!’
‘Don’t I knowit,’ I said.
‘I’mlooking for my aunt. Icould havesworn they told me RoomOne-oh-two, but there’sacolored woman in there.’
I shook my head, trying to look confused.
‘You’relost,allright. You need to go to the other side ofthe building. You’rein thecolored section.’
I smiled at him.
‘Oh.’
Over on the white side ofthe hospitalI found a pay phone next to a waiting area. I got the hospital number fromInformation and dialed it up, asking for the nurses’
station in thecolored wing. Icleared my throat.
‘This is thejailer’s wife overat the policestation,’ I said to the girlwho answered.
‘Mr. Gaston wants you to send the policeman that we’ve got over there back to the station. Tell himthe preacher is on his way in to sign some papers, and Mr.
Gaston can’t be here‘cause he had to leavejust now. So if you could tell himto get over hererightaway…’ Part ofme was saying theseactualwords, and part ofme
was listening to myselfsay them, thinking howI belonged in areformschool orajuvenile delinquent homefor girls, and would probably soon bein one. Sherepeated it
all back to me, making sureshe had itstraight. Her sigh passed over thereceiver.
‘I’lltell him.’
She’ll tell him. Icouldn’t believeit. Icrept back to thecolored sideand hunched over the water fountain as the girl inwhiterelayed all this to him, using alot of hand
gestures. I watched as the policeman put on his hat and walked down the corridor and out the door. When Rosaleen and I stepped fromher room, I looked left, then
right. We had to go past the nurses’ desk to get to the door, but the girlinwhiteseemed preoccupied, sittingwith her head down, writing something.
‘Walk likea visitor,’ I told Rosaleen. Halfway to the desk, the girlstopped writing and stood up.
‘Shitbucket,’I said. I grabbed Rosaleen’sarmand pulled her into a patient’s room.Atinywomanwas perched in the bed, old and birdlike, with a blackberry face.
Her mouth opened when shesawus,and her tonguecurled out likea misplaced comma.
‘I need a little water,’ she said. Rosaleen went over and poured some froma pitcher and gave the woman the glass, while I held my duffel bag at my chest and
peeped out the door. I watched the girl disappear into aroomafewdoors down car- rying somesort of glass bottle.
‘Come on,’ I said to Rosaleen.
‘Y’allleaving already?’ said thetinywoman.
‘Yeah, but I’ll probably be back beforethe day’s out,’said Rosa- leen, morefor my benefit than the woman’s. This time we didn’t walk like visitors, wetore out of
there. Outside, I took Rosaleen’s hand and tugged her down thesidewalk.
‘Since you goteverything elsefigured out, I guess you knowwhere we’re going,’ shesaid,and there wasatonein her voice.
‘We’re going to Highway Forty and thumb arideto Tiburon, SouthCarolina. At least we’re gonnatry.’
I took us the back way, cutting through the city park, down a little alley to Lancaster Street, then three blocks over to May Pond Road, where we slipped into the
vacant lot behind Glenn’s Grocery. We waded throughQueenAnne’s laceand thick-stalked purpleflowers, into dragonfliesand thesmell ofCarolinajasmineso thick I
could almost see it circling in the air like golden smoke. She didn’t ask me why we were going to Tiburon, and I didn’t tell her. What she did ask was ‘When did you
startsaying ‘shit bucket’?’
I’d never resorted to bad language, though I’d heard my share ofit fromT. Ray orelseread it in publicrestrooms.
‘I’mfourteen now. I guess Ican say it ifI want to.’
And I wanted to, right thatminute.
‘Shitbucket,’ I said.
‘Shitbucket, hellfire, damnation, and son ofa mother bitch,’said Rosaleen, laying into eachword like it was sweet potatoes on her tongue. We stood on the side of
Highway 4[-] in a patch ofshade provided by a faded billboard for Lucky Strike cigarettes. I stuck out my thumb while every car on the highway sped up the second
they saw us. Acolored man driving a beat-up Chevy truck full ofcantaloupes had mercy on us. I climbed in first and kept having to scoot over as Rosaleen settled
herself by the window. The man said he was on his way to visit his sister in Columbia, that he was taking the cantaloupes to the state farmers’market. I told himI was
going to Tiburon to visitmy auntand Rosaleenwascoming to do housework for her. Itsounded lame, but heaccepted it.
‘Ican drop you three miles fromTiburon,’ he said. Sunset is the saddest light there is. We rode a long time in the glow ofit, everything silentexcept for the crickets
and thefrogs who wererevving up for twilight. I stared through the windshield as the burned lights took over thesky. Thefarmer flicked on theradio and the Supremes
blared through thetruck cab with ‘Baby, baby, where did our love go?’
There’s nothing like a song about lost love to remind you how everything precious can slip fromthe hinges where you’ve hung it so careful. I laid my head against
Rosaleen’s arm. I wanted her to pat life back into place, but her hands lay still in her lap. Ninety miles after we’d climbed in his truck, the farmer pulled off the road
beside a sign that read TIBURON 3 MILES. It pointed left, toward a road curving away into silvery darkness. Climbing out of the truck, Rosaleen asked ifwe could
have one of hiscantaloupes for our supper.
‘Take yourselftwo,’ hesaid. We waited till his taillights turned to specks no bigger than lightning bugs before wespoke orevenmoved. I was trying not to think how
sad and lost wereallywere. I was not so sureit wasan improvement over livingwith T. Ray, oreven lifein prison. There wasn’tasoulanywhereto help us. But still, I
felt painfully alive, likeevery cellinmy body had alittleflameinsideit, burning so brightly it hurt.
‘At least we got a full moon,’ I told Rosaleen. We started walking. If you think the country is quiet, you’ve never lived in it. Tree frogs alone make you wish for
earplugs. We walked along, pretending it wasaregular day. Rosaleen said it looked likethat farmer who’d driven us here had had a good crop ofcantaloupes. I said it
wasamazing the mosquitoes weren’t out. Whenwe came to a bridge withwater running beneath, we decided we would pick our way down to the creek bed and rest
for the night. It wasa different universe down there, the water shiningwith flecks ofmoving lightand kudzu vines draped between the pinetrees like giant hammocks. It
reminded me ofa GrimmBrothers forest, drawing up the nervous feelings I used to get when I stepped into the pages offairy tales where unthinkablethings werelikely —you just never knew. Rosaleen broke open the cantaloupes, pounding themagainst a creek stone. We ate themdown to their skins, then scooped water into our
handsand drank, notcaring aboutalgae or tadpoles or whether thecows used thecreek for their toilet. Thenwesat on the bank and looked ateach other.
‘I just wanna know, ofallthe places on thisearth, why you picked Tiburon,’ Rosaleen said.
‘I’ve nevereven heard ofit.’
Even though it was dark, I pulled the black Mary picture out ofmy bag and handed it to her.
‘It belonged to mymother. On the back itsays Tiburon, SouthCarolina.’
‘Letme get this straight. You picked Tiburon ‘cause your mother had a picture with that townwritten on the back—that’s it?’
‘Well, think about it,’ I said.
‘She must have been theresometimein her lifeto have owned this picture. And ifshe was,a personmight remember her, you never know.’
Rosaleen held it up to the moonlight to seeit better.
‘Who’s this supposed to be?’
‘The VirginMary,’ I said.
‘Well, if you ain’t noticed, she’s colored,’said Rosaleen, and I could tell it was having an effect on her by the way she kept gaz- ing at it with her mouth parted. I
could read her thought: IfJesus’mother is black, how come we only know about the white Mary? This would be like women finding out Jesus had had a twin sister
who’d gotten halfGod’s genes but none ofthe glory. She handed it back.
‘I guess Ican go to my grave now, becauseI’veseen itall.’
I pushed the picture down inmy pocket.
‘You knowwhat T. Ray said aboutmymother?’ Iasked, wanting finally to tell her what had happened.
‘Hesaid sheleftmeand himway beforeshe died. Thatshe’d justcome back for her things the day theacci- dent happened.’
I waited for Rosaleen to say howridiculous that was, butshesquinted straightahead as ifweighing the possibility.
‘Well, it’s not true,’ I said, my voicerising likesomething had seized it frombelowand was shoving it up into my throat.
‘And if hethinks I’mgoing to believethatstory, he hasa holein his so-called brain. He onlymadeit up to punishme. I knowhe did.’
I could have added that mothers have instincts and hormones that prevent themleaving their babies, that even pigs and opossums didn’t leave their offspring, but
Rosaleen, having finally pondered the matter, said, ‘You’re probably right. Knowing your daddy, hecould do athing likethat.’
‘And mymothercould never do what hesaid she did,’ Iadded.
‘I didn’t knowyour mama,’ Rosaleen said.
‘But I used to see her froma distance sometimes when I came out of the orchard frompicking. She’d be hanging clothes on the line or watering her plants, and
you’d beright there beside her, playing. I only sawher onetime when youweren’t under her feet.’
I had no idea Rosaleen had ever seenmymother. I feltsuddenly light-headed, not knowing ifit was fromhunger or tiredness or this surprising piece of news.
‘What was she doing that time you sawheralone?’ Iasked.
‘She was out behind the tractor shed, sitting on the ground, staring offat nothing. Whenwe walked by, she didn’teven notice us. I remember thinking she looked a
littlesad.’
‘Well, who wouldn’t besad livingwithT. Ray?’ I said. I sawthelightbulb snap on inRosaleen’s facethen, theflash ofrecognition.
‘Oh,’ shesaid.
‘I get it.You ran off‘cause ofwhat your daddy said about your mother. It didn’t have nothing to do withmein jail.And here you got me worryingmyselfsick about
you running away and getting in trouble over me,and youwould’verun offanyway. Well,ain’t it nice of you to fillmein.’
She poked out her lip and looked up toward theroad, makingme wonder ifshe wasabout to walk back the waywecame.
‘So whatare you planning to do?’ shesaid.
‘Go fromtown to town asking peopleabout your mother?Is that your bright idea?’
‘IfI needed somebody to criticize mearound theclock, Icould’ve brought T. Ray along!’ I shouted.
‘And for your information, I don’texactly havea plan.’
‘Well, you sure had one back at the hospital, coming in there saying we’re gonna do this and we’re gonna do that, and I’msupposed to follow you like a pet dog.
You act like you’re my keeper. LikeI’msome dumb nigger you gonnasave.’
Hereyes were hard and narrow. I roseto my feet.
‘That’s not fair!’ Anger sucked theair frommy lungs.
‘Youmeant wellenough,and I’mglad to beaway fromthere, but did you think onceto ask me?’ shesaid.
‘Well, you are dumb!’ I yelled.
‘You have to be dumb to pour your snuff juice on those men’s shoes like that. And then dumber not to say you’re sorry, ifsaying it willsave your life. They were
gonnacome back and kill you, or worse. I got you out ofthere,and this is howyou thank me. Well, fine.’
I stripped offmy Keds, grabbed my bag, and waded into the creek. The coldness cut sharp circles around my calves. I didn’t want to be on the same planet with
her, much less thesameside ofthecreek.
‘You find your ownway fromnowon!’I yelled over my shoulder. On the oppositesideI plopped onto the mossy dirt. Westared across the waterateach other. In
the dark she looked like a boulder shaped by five hundred years of storms. I lay back and closed my eyes. In my dreamI was back on the peach farm, sitting out
behind thetractor shed,and even though it was broad daylight, Icould seea huge, round moon in thesky. It looked so perfect up there. I gazed at itawhile, then leaned
against the shed and closed my eyes. Next I heard a sound like ice breaking, and, looking up, I saw the moon crack apart and start to fall. I had to run for my life. I
woke with my chest hurting. I searched for the moon and found it all in one piece, still spilling light over the creek. I looked across the water for Rosaleen. She was
gone. My heart did flip-flops. Please, God. I didn’t mean to treat her likea pet dog. I was trying to save her. That’sall. Fumbling to get my shoes on, I felt thesame old
grief I’d known in church every single Mother’s Day. Mother, forgive. Rosaleen, where are you? I gathered up my bag and ran along the creek toward the bridge,
hardly aware I was crying. Tripping over a dead limb, I sprawled through the darkness and didn’t bother to get up. I could picture Rosaleen miles fromhere, tearing
down the highway, mumbling, Shitbucket, damnfoolgirl. Looking up, I noticed that the tree I’d fallen beneath was practically bald. Only little bits of green here and
there, and lots of graymoss dangling to the ground. Even in the dark I could see that it was dying, and doing italone in the middle ofall these unconcerned pines. That
was the absolute way of things. Loss takes up inside ofeverything sooner or later and eats right through it. Humming drifted out of the night. It wasn’t a gospel tune
exactly, but itcarried all the personality of one. I followed the sound and found Rosaleen in the middle ofthe creek, nota stitch ofclothes on her body. Water beaded
across her shoulders, shining like drops ofmilk, and her breasts swayed in thecurrents. It was the kind of vision you never really get over. Icouldn’t help it, I wanted to
go and lick the milk beads fromher shoulders. I opened mymouth. I wanted something. Something, I didn’t know what. Mother, forgive. That’s all I could feel. That
old longing spread under me like a great lap, holdingme tight. Offcame my shoes, my shorts, my top. I hesitated withmy underpants, thenworked themoff, too. The
water felt likea glacier melting against my legs. I must have gasped at theiciness, because Rosaleen looked up and seeingmecome naked through the water, started to
laugh.
‘Look at you strutting out here. Jiggle-titand all.’
Ieased down beside her, suspendingmy breath at the water’s sting.
‘I’msorry,’ I said.
‘I know,’ shesaid.
‘Me, too.’
She reached over and patted the roundness ofmy knee like it was biscuit dough. Thanks to the moon, I could see clear down to the creek bottom, all the way to a
carpet of pebbles. I picked one up—reddish, round, asmoothwater heart. I popped it into mymouth, sucking for whatever marrowwas insideit. Leaning back onmy
elbows, I slid down tillthe water sealed over my head. I held my breath and listened to thescratch ofriveragainstmy ears, sinking as faras Icould into thatshimmering,
dark world. But I was thinking aboutasuitcase on thefloor,aboutafaceIcould never quitesee,about thesweetsmell ofcold cream.
I
Chapter Three
Newbeekeepersaretold that the way to find theelusive queen is by first locating hercircle ofattendants. —The QueenMust Die:And Other Affairs ofBeesand Men
love Thoreau best. Mrs. Henrymade us read portions of Walden Pond, and afterward I’d had fantasies of going to a private gardenwhere T. Raywould never find
me. I started appreciating Mother Nature, what she’d done with the world. In my mind she looked like Eleanor Roo- sevelt. I thought about her the next morning
when I woke beside the creek in a bed of kudzu vines. Abarge ofmist floated along the water, and dragonflies, iridescent blue ones, darted back and forth like they
were stitching up the air. It was such a pretty sight for a second I forgot the heavy feeling I’d carried since T. Ray had told me about my mother. Instead I was at
Walden Pond. Day one ofmy newlife, I said to myself. That’s what this is. Rosaleen slept with her mouth open and along piece of drool hanging fromher bottomlip. I
could tell by the way her eyes rolled under her lids she was watching the silver screenwhere dreams come and go. Her swollen face looked better, but in the bright of
day I noticed purple bruises on herarmsand legsas well. Neither one of us had a watch on, but going by thesunwe had slept morethan halfthe morning away. I hated
to wake Rosaleen, so I pulled the wooden picture of Mary out ofmy bag and propped it against a tree trunk in order to study it properly. Aladybug had crawled up
and sat on the HolyMother’scheek, making the most perfect beautymark on her. I wondered ifMary had been an outdoor type who preferred treesand insects over
the churchy halo she had on. I lay back and tried to invent a story about why my mother had owned a black Mary picture. I drew a big blank, probably due to my
ignorance about Mary, who never got much attention at our church. According to Brother Gerald, hellwas nothing but a bonfire for Catholics. We didn’t have any in
Sylvan—only Baptists and Methodists—but we got instructions in case we met themin our travels. We were to offer themthe five-part plan ofsalvation, which they
could accept or not. The church gave us a plastic glove with each step written on a different finger. You started with the pinkie and worked over to the thumb. Some
ladies carried their salvation gloves in their purse in case they ran into a Catholic unexpectedly. The onlyMary storywe talked about was the wedding story—the time
she persuaded her son, practically against his will, to manufacture winein the kitchen out of plainwater. This had been ashock to me, since ourchurch didn’t believein
wine or, for that matter, inwomen having alot ofsay about things.AllIcould really figure was mymother had beenmixed up with the Catholics somehow, and—I have
to say—this secretly thrilled me. I stuffed the picture into my pocket while Rosaleen slept on, blowing puffs ofair that vibrated her lips. I decided she might sleep into
tomorrow, so I shook herarmtill hereyes slit open.
‘Lord, I’mstiff,’ shesaid.
‘I feellikeI’ve been beatenwith astick.’
‘You have been beaten, remember?’
‘But not with astick,’ shesaid. I waited tillshe got to her feet,along, unbelievable process of gruntsand moansand limbscoming to life.
‘What did you dream?’ Iasked when she was upright. She gazed at thetreetops, rubbing herelbows.
‘Well, let’s see. I dreamed the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., knelt down and painted my toenails with the spit fromhis mouth, and every nailwas red like he’d
been sucking on red hots.’
I considered this as we set off for Tiburon, Rosaleen walking like she was on anointed feet, like her ruby toes owned the whole countryside. We drifted by gray
barns, cornfields in need of irrigation, and clumps of Hereford cows, chewing in slow motion, looking very content with their lives. Squinting into the distance, I could
see farmhouses with wide porches and tractor-tire swings suspended fromropes on nearby tree branches; windmills sprouted up beside them, their giant silver petals
creaking a little when the breezes rose. The sun had baked everything to perfection;even the gooseberries on the fence had fried to raisins. The asphalt ran out, turned
to gravel. I listened to thesound it madescraping under our shoes. Perspiration puddled in the notchwhere Rosaleen’scollarbonescametogether. I didn’t knowwhose
stomach was carrying on more about needing food, mine or hers, and since we’d started walking, I’d realized it was Sunday, when the stores were closed up. I was
afraid we’d end up eat- ing dandelions, diggingwild turnipsand grubs out ofthe ground to stay alive. Thesmell offreshmanurefloated out fromthefieldsand took care
ofmy appetitethen and there, but Rosaleen said, ‘Icould eata mule.’
‘Ifwecan find some place openwhenwe get to town, I’ll go in and get us somefood,’ I told her.
‘And what’re we gonna do for beds?’ shesaid.
‘Ifthey don’t havea motel, we’ll haveto rentaroom.’
Shesmiled atmethen.
‘Lily,child, thereain’t gonna beany placethat willtakeacolored woman. I don’tcareifshe’s the VirginMary, nobody’s letting her stay ifshe’scolored.’
‘Well, what was the point ofthe CivilRights Act?’ I said,coming to afullstop in the middle oftheroad.
‘Doesn’t thatmean people haveto let you stay in their motelsand eat in their restaurants if youwant to?’
‘That’s what itmeans, but you gonna haveto drag people kicking and screaming to do it.’
I spent the next mile in deep worry. I had no plan, no prospects ofa plan. Until now I’d mostly believed we would stumble upon a window somewhere and climb
through it into a brand-newlife. Rosaleen, on the other hand, was out here biding timetillwe gotcaught. Counting itas summer vacation fromjail. What I needed wasa
sign. I needed a voice speaking to me like I’d heard yesterday inmy roomsaying, LilyMelissa Owens, your jar is open. I’ll take nine stepsand look up. Whatever my
eyes light on, that’s my sign. When I looked up, I saw a crop duster plunging his little plane over a field of growing things, behind hima cloud of pesticides parachuting
out. Icouldn’t decide what part ofthis sceneI represented: the plantsabout to berescued fromthe bugs or the bugsabout to be murdered by thespray. There wasan
offchanceI was really theairplanezipping over theearth creating rescueand doomeverywhereI went. I felt miserable. The heat had been gathering as we walked, and
it nowdripped downRosaleen’s face.
‘Too bad there’s not a church around here where we could stealsome fans,’she said. Fromfar away the store on the edge of town looked about a hundred years
old, but whenwe got up to it, I sawit wasactually older.Asign over the door said FROGMORE STEW GENERALSTOREANDRESTAURANT. SINCE 1854.
General Sherman had probably ridden by here and decided to spare it on the basis of its name, because I’msure it hadn’t been on looks. The whole front of it was a
forgotten bulletin board: Studebaker Service, Live Bait, Buddy’s Fishing Tournament, Rayford Brothers’ Ice Plant, Deer Rifles $45, and a picture ofa girl wearing a
Coca-Cola bottle cap on her head. Asign announced a gospelsing at the Mount Zion Baptist Church that took place back in 1957, ifanyone wanted to know. My
favorite thing was the fine display ofcar tags nailed up fromdifferent states. I would like to have read every single one, if I’d had the time. In the side yard a colored
man lifted thetop ofa barbecue pit madefroman oil drum, and thesmell of pork lathered in vinegarand pepper drewso much salivafrombeneathmy tongueIactually
drooled onto my blouse. Afewcarsand trucks were parked out front, probably belonging to people who cutchurch and came herestraight fromSunday school.
‘I’ll go in and seeifIcan buy somefood,’ I said.
‘And snuff. I need some snuff,’said Rosaleen. While she slumped on a bench near the barbecue drum, I stepped through the screen door into the mingled smells of
pickled eggsand sawdust, beneath dozens ofsugar-cured hams dangling fromtheceiling. Therestaurant was situated in asection at the back whilethefront ofthestore
was reserved for selling everything fromsugarcanestalks to turpentine.
‘May I help you, young lady?’
Asmallmanwearing a bow tie stood on the other side ofa wooden counter, nearly lost behind a barricade ofscuppernong jelly and Sweet Fire pickles. His voice
was high-pitched,and he had asoft, delicatelook to him. Icould not imagine himselling deer rifles.
‘I don’t believeI’veseen you before,’ hesaid.
‘I’mnot fromhere. I’mvisitingmy grandmother.’
‘I likeit when children spend time with their grandparents,’ hesaid.
‘You can learn alot fromolder folks.’
‘Yes, sir,’ I said.
‘I learned morefrommy grandmother than I did the wholeeighth grade.’
Helaughed likethis was the mostcomicalthing he’d heard in years.
‘Are you herefor lunch? We havea Sunday-platespecial—barbecue pork.’
‘I’lltaketwo ofthemto go,’ I said.
‘And two Coca-Colas, please.’ While I waited for our lunch, I wandered along the store aisles, stocking up for supper. Packages of salted peanuts, buttermilk cookies, two pimiento-cheese
sandwiches in plastic, sour balls,and acan ofRed Rosesnuff. I piled it on thecounter. When hereturned with the platesand drink bottles, heshook his head.
‘I’msorry, but it’s Sunday. Ican’tsellanything fromthestore, just therestaurant. Your grandma ought to knowthat. What’s her nameanyway?’
‘Rose,’ I said, reading it offthesnuffcan.
‘Rose Campbell?’
‘Yes, sir. Rose Campbell.’
‘I thoughtshe only had grandboys.’
‘No, sir, she’s gotme, too.’
Hetouched the bag ofsour balls.
‘Just leaveitall here. I’ll put it back.’
Thecash register pinged,and the drawer banged out. I rummaged inmy bag for the money and paid him.
‘Could you open the Coke bottles for me?’ I asked, and while he walked back toward the kitchen, I dropped the Red Rose snuff in my bag and zipped it up.
Rosaleen had been beaten up, gone without food, slept on the hard ground, and who could say how long before she’d be back in jail oreven killed? She deserved her
snuff. I was speculating howone day, years fromnow, I would send thestorea dollar in an envelopeto cover it, spelling out howguilt had dominated everymoment of
my life, when I found myself looking at a picture of the black Mary. I do not mean a picture of just any black Mary. I mean the identical, very same, exact one as my
mother’s. She stared at me fromthe labels ofa dozen jars of honey. BLACK MADONNAHONEY, they said. The door opened, and a family came in fresh from
church, the mother and daughter dressed alike in navywithwhite Peter Pan collars. Light streamed in the door, hazy, warped, blurred with drizzles of yellow. The little
girlsneezed,and her mother said, ‘Come here, let’s wipe your nose.’
I looked again at the honey jars,at theamber lights swimming insidethem,and made myself breatheslowly. I realized it for thefirst timeinmy life:thereis nothing but
mystery in the world, howit hides behind thefabric of our poor, browbeat days, shining brightly, and we don’teven knowit. I thoughtabout the bees that had cometo
my roomat night, howthey’d been part ofitall.And the voiceI’d heard the day before, saying, LilyMelissa Owens, your jar is open, speaking as plain and clearas the
woman in navy speaking to her daughter.
‘Here’s your Coca-Colas,’ the bow-tied manwas saying. I pointed to the honey jars.
‘Where did you get those?’
Hethought thetone ofshock inmy voice was really consternation.
‘I knowwhat youmean.Alot offolks won’t buy it ‘causeit’s got the VirginMary pictured asacolored woman, but see, that’s becausethe womanwho makes the
honey iscolored herself.’
‘What’s her name?’
‘August Boatwright,’ hesaid.
‘She keeps beesall over thecounty.’
Keep breathing, keep breathing.
‘Do you knowwhereshelives?’
‘Oh, sure, it’s the darndest house you ever saw. Painted like Pepto-Bismol.Your grandmother surely’s seen it—you go through town onMain Street till it turns into
the highway to Florence.’
I walked to the door.
‘Thanks.’
‘You tell your grandma hello for me,’ hesaid. Rosaleen’s snores were making the bench slats tremble. I gave herashake.
‘Wake up. Here’s your snuff, but put it in your pocket, ‘causeI didn’texactly pay for it.’
‘You stoleit?’ shesaid.
‘I had to, ‘causethey don’tsellitems fromthestore on Sunday.’
‘Your life has gone straight to hell,’she said. I spread our lunch out like a picnic on the bench butcouldn’teata bite of it tillI told her about the black Mary on the
honey jarand the beekeeper named August Boatwright.
‘Don’t you think mymother must’ve known her?’ I said.
‘Itcouldn’t bejustacoincidence.’
She didn’tanswer, so I said louder, ‘Rosaleen? Don’t you think so?’
‘I don’t knowwhat I think,’ shesaid.
‘I don’t want you getting your hopes up too much, isall.’
Shereached overand touched my cheek.
‘Oh, Lily, what have we goneand done?’
Tiburon was a place like Sylvan, minus the peaches. In front of the domed courthouse someone had stuck a Confederate flag in the mouth of their public cannon.
South Carolina was Dixie first, America second. You could not get the pride of Fort Sumter out of us if you tried. Strolling downMain Street, we moved through long
blue shadows cast fromthe two-story buildings that ran the length of the street. At a drugstore, I peered through the plate glass at a soda fountain with chrome trim,
where they sold cherry Cokes and banana splits, thinking that soon it would not be just for white people anymore. We walked past Worth InsuranceAgency, Tiburon
County Rural Electric office, and the Amen Dollar Store, which had Hula Hoops, swim goggles, and boxes of sparklers in the window with SUSMER FN spraypainted across the glass. Afew places, like the Farmers Trust Bank, had GOLDWATER FOR PRESIDENT signs in their windows, sometimes with a bumper sticker
across the bottomsayingAFFIRMATION VIETNAM. At the Tiburon post office I left Rosaleen on the sidewalk and stepped inside to where the post office boxes
and the Sunday newspapers were kept. As far as I could tell, there were no wanted posters in there ofme and Rosaleen, and the front-page headline in the Columbia
paper wasabout Castro’s sister spying for the CIAand nota word abouta white girl breaking a Negro woman out ofjail in Sylvan. I dropped a dimeinto theslotand
took one ofthe papers, wondering ifthestorywas insidesomewhere. Rosaleen and I squatted on the ground in an alley and spread out the paper, opening every page.
It was full ofMalcolmX, Saigon, the Beatles, tennisat Wimbledon, and a motel in Jackson, Mississippi, thatclosed down rather than accept Negro guests, but nothing
aboutmeand Rosaleen. Sometimes youwant to fall on your kneesand thank God in heaven forallthe poor news reporting that goes on in the world.
H
T
Chapter Four
oneybees are social insects and live in colonies. Each colony is a family unit, comprising a single, egg-laying female or queen and her many sterile daughters called
workers. The workers cooperate in the food-gathering, nest-building and rearing the offspring. Males are reared only at the times of year when their presence is
required. —Bees ofthe World
he womanmoved along arowofwhite boxes that bordered woods besidethe pink house, a houseso pink it remained ascorched shock on the back ofmy eyelids
after I looked away. She was tall, dressed inwhite, wearing a pith helmet with veils that floated across her face, settled around her shoulders, and trailed down her
back. She looked like anAfrican bride. Lifting the tops off the boxes, she peered inside, swinging a tin bucket ofsmoke back and forth. Clouds of bees rose up and
flew wreaths around her head. Twice she disappeared in the fogged billows, then gradually reemerged like a dreamrising up fromthe bottomof the night. We stood
across theroad, Rosaleen and I, temporarilymute. Me out ofawefor the mystery playing outand Rosaleen because her lips weresealed withRed Rosesnuff.
‘She’s the woman who makes the Black Madonna Honey,’ I said. I was unable to take my eyes off her, the Mistress of Bees, the portal into my mother’s life.
August. Rosaleen, wilting, spitastreamof black juice, thenwiped away the mustache of perspiration above her lip.
‘I hopeshe makes honey better than she picks out paint.’
‘I like it,’ I announced. We waited till she went inside, then crossed the highway and opened the gate in the picket fence that was about to topple over fromthe
weight ofCarolina jasmine. Add that to all the chive, dillweed, and lemon balmgrowing around the porch and the smellcould knock you over. We stood on the porch
in the pink light shining offthe house. June bugs flickered allaround, and music notes floated frominside, sounding like a violin, only a lot sadder. My heart kicked in. I
asked Rosaleen ifshecould hear it beating, it was that loud.
‘I don’t hear nothing but the Good Lord askingme what I’mdoing here.’
Shespit what I hoped was thelast of her snuff. I knocked on the door whileshe muttered aslewofwords un- der her breath:Give mestrength…Baby Jesus…Lost
our feeble minds. The musicstopped. In thecorner ofmy eyeIcaughtaslight movementat the window, a venetian blind slit open, then closed. When the door opened,
it was not the woman inwhite butan- other one wearing red, her haircutso short it resembled alittle gray,curlicueswimcap pulled tight over her scalp. Her facestared
at us, suspiciousand stern. I noticed shecarried a musical bowtucked under herarmlikearidingwhip. Itcrossed mymind she might useit on us.
‘Yes?’
‘Are youAugust Boatwright?’
‘No, I’mJune Boatwright,’ shesaid, hereyes sweeping over thestitches onRosaleen’s forehead.
‘August Boatwright is my sister. You cameto see her?’
I nodded,and simultaneously another woman appeared, with barefeet. She worea green-and-whitesleeveless ginghamdressand short braids that stuck straight out
all over her head.
‘I’mMayBoatwright,’ shesaid.
‘I’mAugust’s sister, too.’
Shesmiled at us, one ofthose odd grins that let you knowshe was notan altogether normal person. I wished June with her whip would grin, too, butshe only looked
annoyed.
‘Is Augustexpecting you?’ shesaid, directing her words to Rosaleen. Ofcourse Rosaleen jumped in ready to spillthe wholestory.
‘No, see, Lily has this picture—‘ I brokein.
‘I sawa honey jar back at thestore,and the man said…’
‘Oh, you’vecomefor honey. Well, why didn’t you say so? Come on in thefront parlor. I’ll get August.’
I shot a look at Rosaleen that said, Are you crazy? Don’t tell themabout the picture. We were going to have to get our stories straight, that was for sure. Some
people have a sixth sense, and some are duds at it. I believe I must have it, because the moment I stepped into the house I felt a trembling along my skin, a traveling
current that moved up my spine, downmy arms, pulsing out frommy fingertips. I was practically radiating. The body knows things a long time before the mind catches
up to them. I was wonderingwhat my body knew that I didn’t. I smelled furniture wax everywhere. Somebody had gone over the entire parlor with it, a big roomwith
fringed throw rugs, an old piano with a lace runner, and cane-bottomrockers draped with afghans. Each chair had its own little velvet stoolsitting before it. Velvet. I
went overand rubbed my hand across one ofthem. Next I walked over to a drop-leaftable and sniffed a beeswax candle that smelled precisely like the furniture wax.
It sat in astar-shaped holder next to ajigsawpuzzlein progress, though Icouldn’t tellwhat pictureit would make.Awide-mouthed milk bottlefilled with gladiolus was
perched on another table under the window. The curtains were organdy, not your average white organdy but silver-gray, so the air came throughwith a slightly smoky
shimmer. Imagine walls with nothing on thembut mirrors. I counted five of them, each one with a big brass frame around it. Then I turned around and looked back
toward the door where I’d come in. Over in the corner wasa carving ofa woman nearly three feet tall. She was one ofthose figures that had leaned out fromthe front
ofaship in olden times, so old shecould have been on the Santa Maria withColumbus forallI knew. She was black as shecould be, twisted like driftwood frombeing
out in the weather, her face a map ofall the storms and journeys she’d been through. Her rightarmwas raised, as ifshe was pointing the way, except her fingers were
closed in a fist. It gave her a serious look, like she could straighten you out if necessary. Even though she wasn’t dressed up like Mary and didn’t resemble the picture
on the honey jar, I knewthat’s who she was. She had afaded red heart painted on her breastand a yellowcrescentmoon, worn down and crooked, painted where her
body would have blended into the ship’s wood. Acandle inside a tall red glass threw glints and glimmers across her body. She was a mix ofmighty and humble all in
one. I didn’t knowwhat to think, but what I felt was magneticand so big itached likethe moon had entered my chestand filled it up. The only thing Icould compareit
to was the feeling I got one time when I walked back fromthe peach stand and saw the sun spreading across the late afternoon, setting the top of the orchard on fire
while darkness collected underneath. Silence had hovered over my head, beauty multiplying in the air, the trees so transparent I felt I could see through to something
pureinsidethem. My chest had ached then, too, this very same way. Thelips on thestatue had a beautiful, bossy halfsmile, thesight ofwhich caused meto move both
my hands up to my throat. Everything about that smile said, Lily Owens, I know you down to the core. I felt she knew what a lying, murdering, hating person I really
was. HowI hated T. Ray, and the girlsat school, but mostlymyselffor taking awaymymother. I wanted to cry, but then, in the next instant, I wanted to laugh, because
the statue also made me feel like Lily the Smiled-Upon, like there was goodness and beauty in me, too. Like I really had all that fine potential Mrs. Henry said I did.
Standing there, I loved myselfand I hated myself. That’s what the black Mary did to me, made mefeelmy glory and my shameat thesametime. I stepped closer to her
and caught the faint scent of honey coming fromthe wood. May walked over and stood beside me, and I could smell nothing then but the pomade on her hair, onions
on her hands, vanilla on her breath. Her palms were pink likethe bottoms of her feet, herelbows darker than therest of her, and for somereason thesight ofthemfilled
me with tenderness. August Boatwrightentered, wearing a pair ofrimless glassesand alime green chiffon scarftied onto her belt.
‘Who’ve we got here?’she said, and the sound of her voice snapped me back to my ordinary senses. She was almond-butterywith sweatand sun, her face corrugated with athousand caramelwrinklesand her hair looking flour dusted, but therest of her seemed decades younger.
‘I’mLily, and that’s Rosaleen,’I said, hesitating as Juneappeared in the doorway behind her. I opened mymouthwithoutany sense ofwhat I would say next. What
came outcouldn’t havesurprised me more.
‘Weran away fromhomeand don’t haveany placeto go,’I told her.Any other day ofmy lifeIcould have won afibbing contest hands down, and that, that is what
I came up with: the pathetic truth. I watched their faces, especiallyAugust’s. She took off her glasses and rubbed the depressions on each side of her nose. It was so
quiet I could hear a clock ticking in another room. August replaced her glasses, walked to Rosaleen, and examined the stitches on her forehead, the cut under her eye,
the bruisesalong her templeand arms.
‘You look like you’ve been beaten.’
‘She fell down the front steps when we were leaving,’ I offered, returning to my natural fibbing habit. August and June traded looks while Rosaleen narrowed her
eyes, lettingme knowI’d doneitagain, speaking for her likeshe wasn’teven there.
‘Well, you can stay here till you figure out what to do. We can’t have you living on the side ofthe road,’saidAugust. The intake ofJune’s breath nearly sucked the
air fromtheroom.
‘But, August—’
‘They’llstay here,’ sherepeated in a way that letme knowwho the big sister wasand who thelittlesister was.
‘It’ll beallright. We’ve got thecots in the honey house.’
Juneflounced out, her red skirt flashing around the door.
‘Thank you,’ I said to August.
‘You’re welcome. Now, sit down. I’ll getsome orangeade.’ We gotsituated in thecane-bottomrockers while May stood guard, grinning hercrazy-woman grin. She had great bigmuscles in herarms, I noticed.
‘Howcome y’all have names fromacalendar?’ Rosaleen asked her.
‘Our mother loved spring and summer,’ May said.
‘We had anApril, too, but…she died when she was little.’
May’s grin dissolved, and out of nowhere she started humming ‘Oh! Susanna’ like her life depended on it. Rosaleen and I stared at her as her humming turned into
hard crying. She cried like April’s death had happened only this second. FinallyAugust returned with a tray of four jelly glasses, orange slices stuck real pretty on the
rims.
‘Oh, May, honey, you go on out to the walland finish your cry,’ she said, pointing her to the door and giving her a nudge. August acted like this was the sort of
normal behavior happening in every household in SouthCarolina.
‘Here you go orangeade.’
I sipped. Rosaleen, however, downed hers so fast she let out a belch that the boys inmy old junior highwould have envied. It was unbelievable. August pretended
she didn’t hear it whileI stared at the velvet footstooland wished Rosaleen could be morecultured.
‘So you’re Lily and Rosaleen,’ Augustsaid.
‘Do you havelast names?’
‘Rosaleen…Smith,and Lily…Williams,’ I lied and then launched in.
‘See, my mother died when I was little, and then my father died in a tractor accident last month on our farmin Spar- tanburg County. I don’t have any other kin
around here, so theywere going to send meto a home.’
Augustshook her head. Rosaleen shook hers, too, but fora different reason.
‘Rosaleenwas our housekeeper,’ I went on.
‘She doesn’t have any family but me, so we decided to go up to Virginia to find my aunt. Except we don’t have anymoney, so if you have any work for us to do
while we’re here, maybe wecould earn alittle before heading on. Wearen’t really in a hurry to get to Virginia.’
Rosaleen glared atme. Fora minutethere was nothing but iceclinking in our glasses. I hadn’t realized howsweltering theroomwas, howstimulated my sweat glands
had gotten. I could actually smellmyself. I cut my eyes over to the black Mary in the corner and back to August. She put down her glass. I had never seen eyes that
color,eyes the purestshade of ginger.
‘I’mfromVirginia myself,’ shesaid,and for somereason this stirred up thecurrent that had moved inmy limbs when I’d firstentered theroom.
‘Allright, then. Rosaleen can help May in the house,and you can help meand Zachwith the bees.
Zach is mymain helper, so Ican’t pay you anything, butat least you’ll havearoomand somefood tillwecall yourauntand seeabout her sending some bus money.’
‘I don’texactly knowher whole name,’ I said.
‘My father justcalled her Aunt Bernie; I never met her.’
‘Well, what were you planning to do,child, go door to door inVirginia?’
‘No, ma’am, just Richmond.’
‘I see,’ said August. And the thing was, she did. She saw right through it. That afternoon, heat built up in the skies over Tiburon; finally it gave way to a
thunderstorm. August, Rosaleen, and I stood on the screen porch that jutted off the back of the kitchen and watched the clouds bruise dark purple over the treetops
and the wind whip the branches. We were waiting foralet-up soAugustcould showus our newquarters in the honey house, aconverted garagein the back corner of
the yard painted the same hot-flamingo shade as the rest ofthe house. Now and then sprays ofrain flew overand misted our faces. Every time I refused to wipe away
the wetness. It made the world seemso alive to me. I couldn’t help but envy the way a good stormgot everyone’s attention. August went back into the kitchen and
returned with threealuminumpie pansand handed themout.
‘Come on. Let’s makearun for it. These will keep our heads dry,at least.’
August and I dashed into the downpour, holding the pans over our heads. Glancing back, I saw Rosaleen holding the pie pan in her hand, missing the whole point. WhenAugust and I reached the honey house, we had to huddle in the door and wait on her. Rosaleen glided along, gathering rain in the pan and flinging it out like a
child would do. She walked on puddles liketheywere Persian carpets, and when aclap ofthunder boomed around us, shelooked up at the drowned sky, opened her
mouth, and let the rain fall in. Ever since those men had beaten her, her face had been so pinched and tired, hereyes dull like they’d had the light knocked out ofthem.
NowIcould seeshe was returning to herself, looking likean all-weather queen out there, like nothing could touch her. If only shecould getsome manners. Theinside of
the honey house was one big room filled with strange honey-making machines—big tanks, gas burners, troughs, levers, white boxes, and racks piled with waxy
honeycombs. My nostrils nearly drowned in thescent ofsweetness. Rosaleenmade gigantic puddles on thefloor whileAugust ran for towels. I stared ataside wall that
was covered with shelves of mason jars. Pith helmets with netting, tools, and wax candles hung fromnails near the front door, and a thin veneer of honey lay across
everything. The soles ofmy shoes stuck slightly as I walked. August led us to a tiny corner roomin the back with a sink, a full-lengthmirror, one curtainless window,
and two wooden cots made up with cleanwhitesheets. I placed my bag on thefirstcot.
‘May and I sleep out heresometimes whenwe’re harvesting honey round theclock,’ Augustsaid.
‘Itcan get hot, so you’ll need to turn thefan on.’
Rosaleen reached up to whereit sat on ashelfalong the back walland flipped theswitch, causing cobwebs to blowoffthe bladesand fly all over theroom. She had
to pick themoff hercheekbones.
‘You need dry clothes,’ August told her.
‘I’llair-dry,’ Rosaleen said,and shestretched out on thecot, making thelegs on it bow.
‘You’ll haveto comeinto the houseto usethe bathroom,’ Augustsaid.
‘We don’t lock the doors, so justcome on in.’
Rosaleen’seyes wereclosed. She had already drifted offand was making little puff noises with her mouth. August lowered her voice.
‘So shefell down thesteps?’
‘Yes, ma’am, she went down headfirst. Caught her foot in therug at thetop ofthestairs, the one mymother hooked herself.’
Thesecret ofa good lieis don’t overly explain,and throwin one good detail.
‘Well, Miss Williams, you can start work tomorrow,’shesaid. I stood there wonderingwho she was talking to, who was Miss Williams, when I remembered I was
LilyWilliams now. That’s the other secret to lying—you haveto keep your stories straight.
‘Zachwill beaway fora week,’ she was saying.
‘His family has gone down to Pawley’s Island to visit his mama’s sister.’
‘If you don’tmind measking, what willI be doing?’
‘You’llwork withZach and me, making the honey, doingwhatever needs doing. Come on, I’ll give you thetour.’ We walked back to thelargeroomwith allthe machines. Sheled meto acolumn ofwhite boxes stacked one on top ofthe other.
‘Thesearecalled supers,’ shesaid, setting one on thefloor in front ofmeand removing thelid.
Fromthe outsideit looked likearegular old drawer pulled out ofthe dresser, but insideit wereframes of honeycomb hung in a neat row. Each frame was filled with
honey and sealed over with beeswax. She pointed her finger.
‘That’s the uncappcr over there, where wetakethe wax offthecomb. Then it goes through the waxmelter over here.’
I followed her, stepping over bits and pieces of honeycomb, which is what they had instead of dust bunnies. She stopped at the big metal tank in the center of the
room.
‘This is thespinner,’ shesaid, patting thesidelikeit wasa good dog.
‘Go on up thereand look in.’
Iclimbed up thetwo-step ladderand peered over theedge, whileAugust flipped aswitch and an old motor on thefloor sputtered and cranked. Thespinner started
slowly, gaining speed likethecotton-candymachineat thefair, untilit was sending heavenly smells into theatmosphere.
‘Itseparates out the honey,’ shesaid.
‘Takes out the bad stuff, leaves in the good. I’vealways thought howniceit would beto havespinners likethis for human beings, just toss themin and let thespinner
do its work.’
I looked back at her, and she was staring at me with her ginger-cake eyes. Was I paranoid to think that when she’d said human beings, what she reallymeant was
me? Sheturned offthe motor, and the humming stopped with ase- ries ofticking sounds. Bending over the brown tubeleading fromthespinner, shesaid, ‘Fromhereit
goes into the baffletank, then over to the warming pan,and finally into thesettling tank. That’s the honey gate, where wefillthe buckets.
You’ll get the hang ofit.’
I doubted it. I’d never seen such acomplex situation inmy life.
‘Well, I imagine you’llwant to rest up like Rosaleen. Supper isatsix. You likesweet-potato biscuits? That’s May’s specialty.’ When she left, I lay on the empty cot while rain crashed on the tin roof. I felt like I’d been traveling for weeks, like I’d been dodging lions and tigers on a safari
through the jungle, trying to get to the Lost Diamond City buried in the Congo, which happened to be the theme of the last matinee I’d seen in Sylvan before leaving. I
felt that somehow I belonged here, I really did, but Icould have been in the Congo for how unfamiliar it felt. Staying in a colored house with colored women, eating off
their dishes, lying on their sheets—it was notsomething I wasagainst, but I was brand-newto it,and my skin had never feltso whiteto me. T. Ray did not think colored
womenwere smart. Since I want to tell the whole truth, whichmeans the worst parts, I thought they could be smart, but not as smart as me, me beingwhite. Lying on
thecot in the honey house, though, allIcould think wasAugust is so intelligent, so cultured, and I was surprised by this. That’s what let me knowI had some prejudice
buried in- side me. WhenRosaleenwokefromher nap, beforeshe had achanceto raise her head offthe pillow, I said, ‘Do you likeit here?’
‘I guess I do,’ shesaid, working to get herselfto asitting posi- tion.
‘So far.’
‘Well, I likeit, too,’ I said.
‘So I don’t want you saying anything to mess it up, okay?’
Shecrossed herarms over her belly and frowned.
‘Like what?’
‘Don’tsay anything about the black Mary pictureI got inmy bag, okay? And don’tmentionmymother.’
Shereached up and started twisting some of her loose braids back together.
‘Now, howcome youwanna keep thatasecret?’
I hadn’t had timeto sort out my reasons. I wanted to say, BecauseI just want to be normalforalittle while—notarefugee girl looking for her mother, butaregular
girl paying asummer visit to Tiburon, SouthCarolina. I want timeto winAugust over, so she won’t send me back when shefinds out what I’ve done.And thosethings
weretrue, buteven as they crossed mymind, I knewthey didn’tcompletely explainwhy talking toAugustabout mymother made meso uneasy. I went overand began
helpingRosaleenwith her braids. My hands, I noticed, wereshaking alittle.
‘Just tellme you aren’t gonnasay anything,’ I said.
‘It’s your secret,’ shesaid.
‘You do what youwant with it.’
The next morning I woke early and walked outside. The rain had stopped and the sun glowed behind a bank ofclouds. Pinewoods stretched beyond the honey
house in every direction. I could make out about fourteen beehives tucked under the trees in the distance, the tops of thempostage stamps of white shine. The night
before, during dinner, August had said she owned twenty-eight acres left to her by her granddaddy. Agirlcould get lost on twenty-eight acres in a little town like this.
She could open a trapdoorand disappear. Light spilled through a crack in a red-rimmed cloud, and I walked toward italong a path that led fromthe honey house into
the woods. I passed achild’s wagon loaded with garden tools. It rested besidea plot growing tomatoes tied to wooden stakes with pieces of nylon hose. Mixed inwith
themwere orangezinniasand lavender gladiolus that dipped toward the ground. Thesisters loved birds, Icould see. There wasaconcrete birdbath and tons offeeders —hollowed-out gourds and rows of big pinecones sitting everywhere, each one smeared with peanut butter. Where the grass gave way to the woods, I found a stone
wall crudely cemented together, not even knee high but nearly fifty yards long. It curved on around the property and abruptly stopped. It didn’t seem to have any
purpose to it. Then I noticed tiny pieces of folded-up paper stuck in the crevices around the stones. I walked the length of the fence, and it was the same all the way,
hundreds ofthese bits of paper. I pulled one outand opened it, but the writingwas too blurred fromrain to make out. I dug outanother one. Birmingham, Sept 15, four
little angels dead. I folded it and put it back, feeling like I’d done something wrong. Stepping over the wall, I moved into the trees, pickingmy way through little ferns
with their blueogreen feathers, careful not to tear the designs thespiders had worked so hard on allmorning. It was like meand Rosaleen really had discovered the Lost
Dia- mond City. As I walked, I began to hear the sound of runningwater. It’s impossible to hear that sound and not go searching for the source. I pushed deeper into
the woods. The growth turned thick, and sticker bushes snagged my legs, but I found it—alittleriver, not much bigger than thecreek where Rosaleen and I had bathed.
I watched the currents meander, the lazy ripples that once in a while broke along the surface. Taking offmy shoes, I waded in. The bottomturned mushy, squishing up
through my toes. A turtle plopped offa rock into the water right in front of me, nearly scaring the Lord Jesus out of me. There was no telling what other invisible
creatures I was out here socializing with—snakes, frogs, fish, a whole river world of biting bugs, and I could have cared less. When I put on my shoes and headed
back, the light poured down in shafts, and I wanted it to always be like this—no T. Ray, no Mr. Gaston, nobody wanting to beat Rosaleen senseless. Just the raincleaned woodsand therising light.
T
Chapter Five
Let’s imaginefora moment that wearetiny enough to followa beeinto a hive. Usually thefirst thingwe would haveto get used to is the darkness…
—Exploring the World ofSocialInsects
he first week at August’s was a consolation. The world will give you that once in a while, a brief time out; the boxing bell rings and you go to your corner, where
somebody dabs mercy on your beat-up life. All that week no one brought up my father, supposedly dead in a tractor accident, or my long-lost aunt Bernie in
Virginia. Thecalendar sisters just took us in. Thefirst thing they did was takecare ofRosaleen’sclothes.August got into her truck and went straight to theAmenDollar
Store, where she bought Rosaleen four pairs of panties, a pale blue cotton nightgown, three waistless, Hawaiian-looking dresses, and a bra that could have slung
boulders.
‘Thisain’tcharity,’ said RosaleenwhenAugustspread this,across the kitchen table.
‘I’ll pay itall back.’
‘You canwork it off,’ said August. May cameinwithwitch hazeland cotton ballsand began to clean up Rosaleen’s stitches.
‘Somebody knocked the daylights out of you,’ she said, and a moment later she was humming ‘Oh! Susanna’at that same frantic speed she’d hummed it before.
Junejerked her head up fromthetable, whereshe was inspecting the purchases.
‘You’re humming thesong again,’ shesaid to May.
‘Why don’t you excuse yourself?’
May dropped her cotton ball on the table and left the room. I looked at Rosaleen, and she shrugged. June finished cleaning the stitches herself; it was distasteful to
her, Icould tell by the way she held her mouth, howit drewinto atight buttonhole. I slipped out to find May. I was going to say, I’llsing ‘Oh! Susanna’ with you start to
finish, but Icouldn’t find her. It was Maywho taught methe honey song: Placea beehive onmy graveand let the honey soak through. When I’mdead and gone, that’s
what I want fromyou. The streets of heaven are gold and sunny, but I’llstick with my plot and a pot of honey. Place a beehive on my grave and let the honey soak
through. I loved the silliness of it. Singing made me feel like a regular person again. May sang the song in the kitchen when she rolled dough or sliced tomatoes, and
August hummed it when she pasted labels on the honey jars. It said everything about living here. We lived for honey. We swallowed a spoonful in the morning to wake
us up and one at night to put us to sleep. We took it with every meal to calm the mind, give us stamina, and prevent fatal disease. We swabbed ourselves in it to
disinfectcuts or healchapped lips. It went in our baths, our skin cream, our raspberry teaand biscuits. Nothingwas safefromhoney. In one week my skinny armsand
legs began to plump outand thefrizzinmy hair turned to silkenwaves.August said honeywas theambrosia ofthe godsand theshampoo ofthe goddesses. I spent my
timein the honey house withAugust while Rosaleen helped May around the house. I learned howto run asteamheated knifealong thesuper, slicing the wax cap offthe
combs, howto load themjust so into the spinner. Iadjusted the flame under the steamgeneratorand changed the nylon stockingsAugust used to filter the honey in the
settling tank. I caught on so fast she said I was a marvel. Those were her very words: Lily, you are marvel. My favorite thing was pouring beeswax into the candle
molds. August used a pound ofwax percandle and pressed tiny violets into them, which Icollected in the woods. She had a mail-order business to stores in places as
faraway as Maineand Vermont. People up there bought so many of hercandlesand jars of honey shecouldn’t keep up with it, and there weretins ofBlack Madonna
All-Purpose Beeswax for her specialcustomers.August said itcould make your fishing linefloat, your button thread stronger, your furniture shinier, your stuck window
glide, and your irritated skin glow like a baby’s bottom. Beeswaxwas a miracle cure for everything. May and Rosaleen hit it off right away. Maywas simpleminded. I
don’t mean retarded, because she was smart in some ways and read cookbooks nonstop. I mean she was naive and unassuming, a grown-up and a child at the same
time, plus she was a touch crazy. Rosaleen liked to say May was a bona ride candidate for the nuthouse, but she still took to her. I would come into the kitchen and
theywould be standing shoulder to shoulder at the sink, holding ears ofcorn they couldn’t get shucked for talking. Or they’d be dabbing pinecones with peanut butter
for the birds. It was Rosaleenwho figured out the mystery of‘Oh! Susanna.’
Shesaid if you kept things on a happy note, May did fine, but bring up an unpleasantsubject—like Rosaleen’s head full ofstitches or thetomatoes having rot-bottom —and Maywould start humming ‘Oh! Susanna.’
It seemed to be her personalway ofwarding offcrying. It worked for things liketomato rot, but not for much else.Afewtimes shecried so bad, ranting and tearing
her hair, that Rosaleen had to come getAugust fromthe honey house. August would calmly send May out back to the stone wall. Going out there was about the only
thing thatcould bring heraround. May didn’tallowrat traps in the house,as shecouldn’teven bear thethought ofasuffering rat. But what really drove Rosa- leen crazy
was May catching spiders and carrying themout of the house in the dustpan. I liked this about May, since it reminded me of my bug-loving mother. I went around
helpingMay catch granddaddy longlegs, not just becauseasmashed bug could send her over theedge but becauseI felt I was being loyal to mymother’s wishes. May
had to havea bananaeverymorning, and this bananaabsolutely could not havea bruise on it. One morning I watched her peelseven bananas in arowbeforeshefound
one withouta bad place. She kept tons of bananasaround the kitchen, stoneware bowlschock-full; next to honey, theywere the most plentiful thing in the house. May
could go through five or more everymorning looking for the ideal, flawless banana, the one that hadn’t gotten banged up by the groceryworld. Rosaleenmade banana
pudding, bananacreampie, bananaJell-O, and bananaslices on lettuceleaftillAugust told her it wasallright, just throwthe blooming thingsaway. The oneit was hard
to getafix onwas June. Shetaught history and English at thecolored high school, but what shereally loved was music. IfI got finished early in the honey house, I went
to the kitchen and watched May and Rosaleen cook, but really I was thereto listen to June play thecello. She played musicfor dying people, going to their homesand
even to the hospital to serenade theminto the next life. I had never heard ofsuch a thing, and I would sit at the table drinking sweet iced tea, wondering if this was the
reason June smiled so little. Maybe she was around death too much. I could tellshe was still bristled at the idea ofme and Rosaleen staying; it was the one sore point
about our being here. I overheard her talking to August one night on the back porch as I was coming across the yard to go to the bathroomin the pink house. Their
voices stopped me besidethe hydrangea bush.
‘You knowshe’s lying,’ said June.
‘I know,’ August told her.
‘But they’rein some kind oftroubleand need a placeto stay. Who’s gonnatakethemin ifwe don’t—a white girland a Negro woman? Nobody around here.’
Forasecond neither spoke. I heard the moths landing against the porch lightbulb. Junesaid, ‘Wecan’t keep arunaway girl here without letting somebody know.’
August turned toward thescreen and looked out,causingmeto step deeper into theshadowsand press my back against the house.
‘Let who know?’ shesaid.
‘The police? Theywould only haul her offsomeplace. Maybe her father really did die. Ifso, who better is she gonnastaywithforthetime being than us?’
‘Whatabout thisauntshe mentioned?’
‘There’s no auntand you knowit,’ said August. June’s voicesounded exasperated.
‘What if her father didn’t diein this so-called tractoraccident? Won’t he belooking for her?’
Apausefollowed. Icreptcloser to theedge ofthe porch.
‘I just have a feeling about this, June. Something tells me not to send her back to some place she doesn’t want to be. Not yet, at least. She has some reason for
leaving. Maybe he mistreated her. I believe wecan help her.’
‘Why don’t you justask her point-blank what kind oftroubleshe’s in?’
‘Everything in time,’ Augustsaid.
‘Thelast thing I want is to scare her offwith alot of questions. She’lltell us when she’s ready. Let’s be patient.’
‘Butshe’s white, August.’
This wasa great revelation—not that I was white but that it seemed likeJune might not want me here because ofmy skin color. I hadn’t known this was possible—
to reject peoplefor beingwhite. Ahot wave passed throughmy body.
‘Righteous indignation’ is what Brother Gerald called it. Jesus had righteous indignation when he turned over the tables in the temple and drove out the thieving
moneychangers. I wanted to march up there, flip acouple oftables over,and say, Excuse me, June Boatwright, but you don’teven knowmet.
‘Let’s seeifwecan help her,’ Augustsaid as June disappeared frommy line ofsight.
‘We owe her that.’
‘I don’t see that we owe her anything,’ June said. A door slammed. August flipped off the light and let out a sigh that floated into the darkness. I walked back
toward the honey house, feeling ashamed thatAugust had seen throughmy hoax but relieved, too, that she wasn’t planning on calling the police or sendingme back—
yet. Yet, she’d said. Mostly I felt resentment at June’s attitude. As I squatted on the grass at the edge of the woods, the pee felt hot between my legs. I watched it
puddlein the dirt, thesmell ofit rising into the night. There was no difference betweenmy pissand June’s. That’s what I thought when I looked at the dark circle on the
ground. Piss was piss. Every evening after supper wesat in their tiny den around thetelevision set with theceramic bee planter on top.You could hardly seethescreen
for the philodendron vines that dangled around the news pictures. I liked the way Walter Cronkite looked, with his black glasses and his voice that knew everything
worth knowing. Here was a man who was not against books, that was plain. Take everything T. Ray was not, shape it into a person, and you would get Walter
Cronkite. Hefilled us in on an integration paradein St.Augustinethat gotattacked by a mob ofwhite people, about white vigilante groups, fire hoses, and teargas. We
got all the totals. Three civil rights workers killed. Two bomb blasts. Three Negro students chased with ax handles. Since Mr. Johnson signed that law, it was like
somebody had ripped thesideseams out ofAmerican life. We watched thelineup of governorscoming on the TVscreen asking for ‘calmand reason.’
August said she was afraid it was only a matter of time before we saw things like that happen right here in Tiburon. I felt white and self-conscious sitting there,
especially with June in the room. Self-conscious and ashamed. Usually May didn’t watch, but one night she joined us, and midway through she started to hum‘Oh!
Susanna.’
She was upset over a Negro man named Mr. Raines, who was killed by a shotgun froma passing car inGeorgia. They showed a picture of his widow, holding her
children, and suddenly May started to sob. Ofcourse everybody jumped up like she was an unpinned grenade and tried to quiet her, but it was too late. May rocked
back and forth, slapping herarmsand scratching at her face. Shetore open her blouseso the pale yellowbuttons went flying like popped corn. I had never seen her like
this,and it frightened me. Augustand Juneeach took one ofMay’selbowsand guided her through the door in a movementso smooth it was plain they’d doneit before.
Afewmoments later I heard water filling theclawfooted tub wheretwiceI’d bathed in honeywater. One ofthesisters had puta pair ofred socks on two ofthetub’s
feet—who knows why. I supposed it was May, who didn’t need areason. Rosaleen and Icrept to the door ofthe bathroom. It wascracked open enough for us to see
May sitting in the tub in a little cloud of steam, hugging her knees. June scooped up handfuls of water and drizzled themslowly across May’s back. Her crying had
eased off nowinto sniffling. August’s voicecamefrombehind the door.
‘That’s right, May. Letallthatmisery slideright off you. Just let it go.’
Each nightafter the news, we all knelt down on the rug in the parlor before black Mary and said prayers to her, or rather the three sisters and I kneltand Rosaleen
sat on achair.August, June, and May called thestatue‘Our Lady ofChains,’for no reason that Icould see. HailMary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art
thou among women…The sisters held strands of wooden beads and moved themin their fingers. In the beginning Rosaleen refused to join in, but soon she was going
rightalongwith therest of us. I had the words memorized after thefirstevening. That’s because wesaid thesamething overand over tillit went on repeating itselfinmy
head long after I stopped mouthing it. It was some kind ofCatholicsaying, but when IaskedAugust iftheywere Catholic, shesaid, ‘Well, yesand no. Mymother was
a good Catholic—she went to mass twicea week at St. Mary’s inRichmond, butmy father wasanOrthodoxEclectic.’
I had no idea what sort of denominationOrthodox Eclectic was, but I nodded like we had a big group ofthemback in Sylvan. She said, ‘May and June and I take
our mother’s Catholicismand mix in our own ingredients. I’mnotsure what you callit, but itsuits us.’ Whenwefinished sayingHailMary about three hundred times, wesaid our personal prayers silently, whichwas kept to a minimum, since our knees would be killing
us by then. I shouldn’t complain, since it was nothing compared to kneeling on the Martha Whites. Finally the sisters would cross themselves fromtheir foreheads to
their navels, and it would be over. Oneevening, after they had crossed themselvesand everyone had left theroombut meandAugust, shesaid, ‘Lily, if you ask Mary’s
help, she’ll giveit.’
I didn’t knowwhat to say to that, so I shrugged. She motioned meto sit next to her in therocking chair.
‘I want to tell you astory,’ shesaid.
‘It’sastory our mother used to tell us whenwe got tired of ourchores or out ofsorts with our lives.’
‘I’mnot tired ofmy chores,’ I said.
‘I know, but it’sa good story. Just listen.’
I situated myselfin thechairand rocked back and forth, listening to thecreaking sounds that rocking chairsarefamous for.
‘Along time ago, across the world inGermany, there was a young nun named Beatrixwho loved Mary. She got sick and tired of being a nun, though, what with all
thechores she had to do and therules she had to go by. So one night when it got too much for her, shetook off her nun outfit, folded it up, and laid it on her bed. Then
shecrawled out theconvent windowand ran away.’
Okay, Icould see where we were headed.
‘Shethoughtshe was in fora wonderfultime,’ Augustsaid.
‘But life wasn’t what she thought it’d be for a runaway nun. She roamed around feeling lost, begging in the streets. After a while she wished she could return to the
convent, butshe knewthey’d never take her back.’ We weren’t talking about Beatrix the nun, that was plain as day. We weretalking aboutme.
‘What happened to her?’ Iasked, trying to sound interested.
‘Well, one day,after years ofwandering and suffering, she disguised herselfand went back to her old convent, wanting to visit onelast time. She went into thechapel
and asked one of her old sisters, ‘Do you remember the nunBeatrix, who ran away?’
’
‘What do youmean?’
‘thesister said.
‘The nunBeatrix didn’t run away. Why, theresheis over near thealtar, sweeping.’ Well, you can imagine howthis floored therealBeatrix. She marched over to thesweepingwoman to getalook at herand discovered it was none other thanMary.
Mary smiled at Beatrix, then led her back to her roomand gave her back her nun outfit. You see, Lily,allthat time Mary had been standing in for her.’
The creaking inmy rocker died away as I slowed to a stop. Just what wasAugust trying to say? That Marywould stand in for me back home in Sylvan so T. Ray
wouldn’t notice I was gone? That was too outlandish even for the Catholics. I think she was tellingme, I know you’ve run away—comeverybody gets the urge to do
that some time—but sooner or later you’llwant to go home. Just ask Mary for help. I excused myself, glad to be out of the spotlight. After that I started asking Mary
for her special help—not to take me home, though, like the poor nunBeatrix. No, Iasked her to see to it that I never went back. Iasked her to drawa curtain around
the pink houseso no one would ever find us. Iasked this daily, and I surecouldn’t get over that it seemed to be working. No one knocked on the doorand dragged us
offto jail. Mary had made us a curtain of protection. On our first Friday evening there, after prayers were finished and orange and pink swirls still hung in the sky from
sunset, I went withAugust to the bee yard. I hadn’t been out to the hives before, so to start offshe gave mealesson inwhatshecalled ‘bee yard etiquette.’
Shereminded methat the world was really one big bee yard, and thesamerules worked finein both places:Don’t beafraid, as no life-loving bee wants to sting you.
Still, don’t be an idiot; wear long sleeves and long pants. Don’t swat. Don’teven think about swatting. If you feelangry, whistle. Angeragitates, while whistlingmelts a
bee’s temper. Act like you know what you’re doing, even if you don’t. Above all, send the bees love. Every little thing wants to be loved. August had been stung so
many times she had immunity. They barely hurt her. In fact, she said, stings helped herarthritis, but since I didn’t have arthritis, I should cover up. She made me put on
one of her long-sleeved white shirts, then placed one of the white helmets onmy head and adjusted the netting. If this was a man’s world, a veil took the rough beard
right off it. Everything appeared softer, nicer. When I walked behind August in my bee veil, I felt like a moon floating behind a night cloud. She kept 48 hives strewn
through the woodsaround the pink house, and another 280 were parceled out on various farms, in river yardsand upland swamps. Thefarmers loved her bees, thanks
to all the pollinating they did, how theymade the watermelons redder and the cucumbers bigger. They would have welcomed her bees for free, butAugust paid every
one of themwith five gallons of honey. She was constantly checking on her hives, driving her old flatbed truck fromone end of the county to the other. The ‘honey
wagon’was what she called it. Bee patrolwas what she did in it. I watched her load the red wagon, the one I’d seen in the back yard, with brood frames, those little
slats thatslip down in the hives for the bees to deposit honey on.
‘We haveto makesurethe queen has plenty ofroomto lay hereggs, orelse we’ll getaswarm,’ shesaid.
‘What does thatmean,aswarm?’
‘Well, if you havea queen and a group ofindependentminded bees thatsplit offfromtherest ofthe hiveand look foranother placeto live, then you’ve gotaswarm.
They usually cluster on alimb somewhere.’
It wasclear she didn’t likeswarms.
‘So,’ shesaid, getting down to business, ‘what we haveto do is take out theframes filled with honey and put in empty ones.’
August pulled the wagonwhileI walked behind itcarrying thesmoker stuffed with pinestrawand tobacco leaves. Zach had placed a brick on top ofeach hivetelling
August what to do. If the brick was at the front, it meant the colony had nearly filled the combs and needed another super. If the brick was at the back, there were
problems like waxmoths or ailing queens. Turned on its side, the brick announced a happy bee family, no Ozzie, just Harriet and her ten thousand daughters. August
struck a match and lit the grass in thesmoker. I watched her faceflare with light, then recedeinto the dimness. She waved the bucket, sending smokeinto the hive. The
smoke, she said, worked better than a sedative. Still, whenAugust removed the lids, the bees poured out in thick black ropes, breaking into strands, a flurry of tiny
wings moving around our faces. The air rained bees, and I sent themlove, just like August said. She pulled out a brood frame, a canvas of whirling blacks and grays,
with rubbings ofsilver.
‘Theresheis, Lily, see her?’ said August.
‘That’s the queen, thelarge one.’
I made a curtsy like people do for the queen of England, whichmadeAugust laugh. I wanted to make her love me so she would keep me forever. If I could make
her love me, maybe she would forget about Beatrix the nun going home and let me stay. When we walked back to the house, darkness had settled in and fireflies
sparked around our shoulders. Icould see Rosaleen and May through the kitchenwindowfinishing the dishes.Augustand I sat in collapsiblelawn chairs besideacrepe
myrtlethat kept dropping blossomsall over the ground. Cello musicswelled out fromthe house, rising higherand higher until it lifted offtheearth, sailing toward Venus.
I could see how suchmusic drew the ghosts out of dying people, giving thema ride to the next life. I wished June’s music could’ve seenmymother out. I gazed at the
stone wallthatedged the backyard.
‘Thereare pieces of paper in the wall out there,’ I said,as ifAugust didn’t knowthis.
‘Yes, I know. It’s May’s wall. She madeit herself.’
‘May did?’
I tried to picture her mixing cement,carrying rocksaround in herapron.
‘She getsalot ofthestones fromtheriver that runs through the woods back there. She’s beenworking on it ten years or more.’
So that’s whereshe got her bigmuscles—rock lifting.
‘Whatareallthosescraps of paper stuck in it?’
‘Oh, it’salong story,’ Augustsaid.
‘I guess you’ve noticed—May is special.’
‘Shesure does get upseteasy,’ I said.
‘That’s because May takes in things differently than therest of us do.’
August reached overand laid her hand onmy arm.
‘See, Lily, when you and I hearabout some misery out there, it might make us feel bad fora while, but it doesn’t wreck our whole world. It’s like we havea built-in
protection around our hearts that keeps the pain fromoverwhelming us. But May—she doesn’t have that. Everything just comes into her—all the suffering out there—
and shefeelsas ifit’s happening to her. Shecan’t tellthe difference.’
Did this mean ifI told May about T. Ray’s mounds of grits, his dozens ofsmallcruelties,aboutmy killingmymother—that hearing it, she would feeleverything I did?
I wanted to know what happened when two people felt it. Would it divide the hurt in two, make it lighter to bear, the way feeling someone’s joy seemed to double it?
Rosaleen’s voice drifted fromthe kitchenwindow, followed byMay’s laughter. May sounded so normaland happy right then, I couldn’t imagine how she’d gotten the
way she was—one minutelaughing and the next overrunwith everybody’s misery. Thelast thing I wanted was to belikethat, but I didn’t want to belike T. Ray either,
immuneto everything but his own selfish life. I didn’t knowwhichwas worse.
‘Was she born likethat?’ Iasked.
‘No, she wasa happy child at first.’
‘Thenwhat happened to her?’
August focused hereyes on thestone wall.
‘May had a twin. Our sisterApril. The two of themwere like one soulsharing two bodies. I never saw anything like it. IfApril got a toothache, May’s gumwould
plump up red and swollen just likeApril’s. Only onetime did our father usea belt strap onApril, and I swear to you, the welts rose onMay’s legs, too. Thosetwo had
no separation between them.’
‘Thefirst daywe were here May told us that April died.’
‘And that’s when itallstarted withMay,’ shesaid, then looked atmelikeshe was trying to decide whether to go on.
‘It’s nota pretty story.’
‘My story’s not pretty either,’ I said,and shesmiled.
‘Well, whenApriland Maywereeleven, theywalked to the market with a nickeleach to buy an icecream. They’d seen the whitechildren in therelicking theircones
and looking atcartoon books. The manwho owned the market gavethemthecones but said they had to go outsideto eat them.Aprilwas headstrong and told himshe
wanted to look at thecartoon books. Sheargued with the man for her ownway, likeshe used to do with Father, and finally the man took herarmand pulled her to the
door, and her ice creamdropped to the floor. She came home screaming that it wasn’t fair. Our father was the only colored dentist in Richmond, and he’d seenmore
than his share of unfairness. Hetold April, ‘Nothing’s fair in this world. Youmightas well get thatstraight right now.’
‘I was thinking howI myself had gotten that straight long beforeI waseleven. I blewa puff ofairacross my face, bendingmy neck to behold the BigDipper. June’s
music poured out, serenading us.
‘I think mostchildrenmight havelet that roll on by, but it did something to April,’ Augustsaid.
‘She got deflated about life, I suppose you’d say. It opened her eyes to things she might not have noticed, being so young. She started having stretches when she
didn’t want to go to school or do anything. By the time she was thirteen, she was having terrible depressions, and ofcourse the whole time, whatever she was feeling,
Maywas feeling. And then, whenAprilwas fifteen, shetook our father’s shotgun and killed herself.’
I hadn’texpected that. I sucked inmy breath, then feltmy hand go up and cover mymouth.
‘I know,’ said August.
‘It’s terribleto hear something likethat.’
She paused a moment.
‘WhenApril died, something inMay died, too. She never was normalafter that. Itseemed likethe world itself became May’s twin sister.’
August’s face was blending into thetreeshadows. I slid up inmy chair so Icould stillsee her.
‘Our mother said she was like Mary, with her heart on the outside of herchest. Mother was good about taking care of her, but when she died, it fell to meand June. We tried for years to get May some help. She saw doctors, but they didn’t have any idea what to do with her except put her away. So June and I came up with this
idea ofa wailingwall.’
‘Awhat kind ofwall?’
‘Wailingwall,’ shesaid again.
‘Like they have in Jerusalem. The Jewish people go there to mourn. It’s a way for themto dealwith their suffering. See, theywrite their prayers on scraps of paper
and tuck themin the wall.’
‘And that’s what May does?’ August nodded.
‘Allthose bits of paper you see out therestuck between thestonesarethings May has written down—all the heavy feelings shecarriesaround. It seems likethe only
thing that helps her.’
I looked in the direction ofthe wall, invisible nowin the darkness. Birmingham, Sept 15, four littleangels dead.
‘Poor May,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ said August.
‘Poor May.’
And wesat in thesorrowfora while, until the mosquitoescollected around usand chased us indoors. In the honey house Rosaleenwas on hercot with thelights out
and the fan going full blast. I stripped down to my panties and sleeveless top, but it was still too hot to move. My chest hurt fromfeeling things. I wondered if T. Ray
was pacing thefloors feeling as injured as I hoped he did. Maybe he was telling himselfwhatarotten excuseforafather he was for not treatingme better, but I doubted
it. Thinking up ways to killme was morelikeit. I turned my pillowoverand over for thecoolness, thinking about May and her walland what the world had cometo that
a person needed something likethat. It gave methe willies to think what might bestuffed in among thoserocks. The wall brought to mymind the bleeding slabs ofmeat
Rosaleen used to cook, the gashes she made up and down them, stuffing themwith pieces of wild, bitter garlic. The worst thing was lying there wanting my mother.
That’s how it had always been; my longing for her nearly always came late at night when my guard was down. I tossed on the sheets, wishing I could crawl into bed
with her and smell her skin. I wondered:Had she worn thin nylon gowns to bed? Did she bobby-pin her hair? I could just see her, propped in bed. Mymouth twisted
as I pictured myselfclimbing in beside her and putting my head against her breast. I would put it right over her beating heart and listen. Mama, I would say. And she
would look down atmeand say, Baby, I’mright here. Icould hear Rosaleen trying to turn over on hercot.
‘You awake?’ I said.
‘Who can sleep in this oven?’shesaid. I wanted to say,You can, as I’d seen her sleeping that day outsidethe Frogmore StewGeneral Storeand Restaurant, and it
had been at least this hot. She had afreshBand-Aid on her forehead. Earlier,August had boiled her tweezersand fingernailscissors in a pot on thestoveand used them
to pluck out Rosaleen’s stitches.
‘How’s your head?’
‘My head is just fine.’
The wordscame out likestifflittlejabs in theair.
‘Are youmad or something?’
‘Why would I be mad? Just ‘cause you spend all your time with August now ain’t no reason for me to care. You pick who you want to talk with, it’s not my
business.’
Icouldn’t believeit; Rosaleen sounded jealous.
‘I don’tspend allmy time with her.’
‘Prettymuch,’ shesaid.
‘Well, what do you expect?I work in the honey house with her. I haveto spend time with her.’
‘Whatabout tonight? You out there working on honey sitting on thelawn?’
‘We werejust talking.’
‘Yeah, I know,’ shesaid,and then sherolled toward the wall, turning her back into a great hump ofsilence.
‘Rosaleen, don’tact likethat. Augustmight knowthingsaboutmymother.’
Sheraised up on herelbowand looked atme.
‘Lily, your mama’s gone,’ shesaid softly.
‘And sheain’tcoming back.’
I satstraight up.
‘Howdo you knowsheisn’taliveright in this very town? T. Ray could’velied about her being dead, just like helied about her leavingme.’
‘Oh, Lily. Girl. You got to stop allthis.’
‘I feel her here,’ I said.
‘She’s been here, I knowit.’
‘Maybeshe was. Ican’tsay. I just knowsomethingsare better leftalone.’
‘What do youmean? That I shouldn’t find out what Ican aboutmy ownmother?’
‘What if—‘ She paused and rubbed the back of her neck.
‘What if you find outsomething you don’t wanna know?’ What I heard her say was Your mother left you, Lily. Let it alone. I wanted to yell how stupid she was, but the words bunched in my throat. I started hiccuping
instead.
‘You think T. Raywas tellingmethetruth about her leavingme, don’t you?’
‘I don’t haveany ideaabout that,’ Rosaleen said.
‘I just don’t want you getting yourself hurt.’
I lay back on the bed. In thesilence my hiccups ricocheted around theroom.
‘Hold your breath, pat your head, and rub your tummy,’Rosaleen said. I ignored her. Eventually I heard her breathing shift to a deeper place. I pulled onmy shorts
and sandalsand crept to the desk whereAugust filled honey orders. I torea piece of paper fromatabletand wrote mymother’s name on it. DeborahOwens. When I
looked outside, I knew I would have to make my way by starlight. I crept across the grass, back to the edge of the woods, to May’s wall. Hiccuping all the way.
Placingmy hands on the stones, allI wanted was not to ache so much. I wanted to let go ofmy feelings fora little while, to pull inmymoat bridge. I pressed the paper
with her name into a cranny that seemed right for her, giving her to the wailing wall. Somewhere along the way my hiccups disappeared. I sat on the ground with my
back against the stones and my head tilted back so I could see the stars with all the spy satellites mixed in. Maybe one of themwas takingmy picture this veryminute.
They could spot me even in the dark. Nothing was safe. I would have to remember that. I started thinking maybe I should find out what I could about my mother,
before T. Ray or the policecamefor us. But whereto start?Icouldn’t just pull out the black Mary pictureand showit toAugust without thetruthwrecking everything,
and she would decide—might decide, would decide, I couldn’t say—that she was obliged to call T. Ray to come get me. And if she knew that Rosaleen was a true
fugitive, wouldn’t she have to call the police? The night seemed like an inkblot I had to figure out. I sat there and studied the darkness, trying to see through it to some
sliver oflight.
T
Chapter Six
The queenmust producesomesubstancethatattracts the workersand thatcan be obtained fromher only by directcontact. This substanceevidently stimulates the
normalworking behavior in the hive. Thischemicalmessenger has been called ‘queen substance.’
Experiments haveshown that the bees obtain it directly fromthe body ofthe queen. —Man and Insects
he next morning, inside the honey house, I woke to banging in the yard. When I pulled myself off the cot and wandered outside, I found the tallest Negro man I’d
ever seenworking on thetruck, bent over the motor, tools scattered around his feet. June handed himwrenchesand what-have-you, cocking her head and beaming
at him. In the kitchenMay and Rosaleenwere working on pancake batter. I didn’t like pancakes that much, but I didn’t say so. I was just thankful it wasn’t grits.After
kneeling on themhalf your life, you don’tcareto eat them. Thetrash canwas full of banana peels, and theelectric percolator bubbled into thetiny glass nozzle on top of
it. Bloop, bloop. I loved the way itsounded, the way itsmelled.
‘Who’s the man out there?’ Iasked.
‘That’s Neil,’ said May.
‘He’s sweet on June.’
‘It looks to melikeJuneis sweet on him, too.’
‘Yeah, butshe won’tsay so,’ said May.
‘She’s kept that poor man strung along for years. Won’tmarry himand won’t let himgo.’
May drizzled batter on the griddlein theshape ofa bigL.
‘This one’s yours,’ shesaid. L for Lily. Rosaleen set thetableand warmed the honey in a bowl of hot water. I poured orangejuiceinto thejelly glasses.
‘HowcomeJune won’t getmarried to him?’ Iasked.
‘She was supposed to getmarried to somebody elsealong timeago,’ said May.
‘But he didn’tshowup for the wedding.’
I looked at Rosaleen, afraid this situation of jilted love might be unfortunate enough to send May into one of her episodes, but she was intent on my pancake. It
struck me for the first time how odd it was that none of them were married. Three unmarried sisters living together like this. I heard Rosaleen make a sound like
Hmmrnph,and I knewshe was thinking about her own sorry husband, wishing he hadn’tshown up for theirceremony.
‘Juneswore offmen and said she would never get married, and then she met Neilwhen hecameto bethe newprincipalat her school. I don’t knowwhat happened
to his wife, but he didn’t have one anymore after he moved here. He has tried every which way to get June to marry him, but she won’t do it. Me and August can’t
convince hereither.’
Awheeze welled up fromMay’schest,and then outcame‘Oh! Susanna.’
Here we go.
‘Lord, notagain,’ said Rosaleen.
‘I’msorry,’ May said.
‘I justcan’t help it.’
‘Why don’t you go out to the wall?’ I said, prying thespatula out of her hand.
‘It’s okay.’
‘Yeah,’ Rosaleen told her.
‘You do what you gotta do.’ We watched fromthe screen dooras May cut past June and Neil. Afewminutes later June came inwithNeil behind her. I worried that his head wouldn’tclear the
door.
‘Whatstarted May off?’ June wanted to know. Hereyes followed aroach that darted beneath therefrigerator.
‘You didn’tstep on aroach in front of her, did you?’
‘No,’ I said.
‘We didn’teven seearoach.’
She opened thecabinet under thesink and dug into the back fora pump can of bug killer. I thoughtaboutexplaining to her mymother’s ingenious method ofridding
the house ofroaches—crackercrumbsand marshmallow—but then I thought, This is June, forget it.
‘Well, what upset her, then?’ Juneasked. I hated to come outand say it withNeilstanding right there, but Rosaleen didn’t haveany problemwith it.
‘She’s upset youwon’tmarryNeil.’
I had neverconsidered untilthen thatcolored peoplecould blush, or maybeit wasanger that turned June’s faceand ears such a dark plumcolor. Neillaughed.
‘Seethere. You should marrymeand quit upsetting your sister.’
‘Oh, get out of here,’ shesaid,and gave hima push.
‘You promised me pancakes, and I’mgonna have them,’ he said. He wore blue jeans and an undershirt with grease smears on it, along with horn-rimmed glasses.
Helooked likea very studious mechanic. Hesmiled atmeand thenRosaleen.
‘So are you gonnaintroduce me or keep mein the dark?’
I have noticed that if you look carefully at people’seyes thefirst fiveseconds they look at you, thetruth oftheir feelings willshinethrough for justan instant beforeit
flickersaway. June’seyes turned dulland hard when shelooked atme.
‘This is Lily and Rosaleen,’ shesaid.
‘They’re visiting fora while.’
‘Where do you come from?’ he asked me. This is the number one most-asked question in all of South Carolina. We want to know if you are one of us, if your
cousin knows our cousin, if your little sister went to school with our big brother, if you go to the same Baptist church as our ex-boss. We are looking for ways our
stories fit together. It was rare, though, for Negroes to ask white people where they’re from, because there was nothing much to be gained fromit, as their stories
weren’t that likely to link up.
‘SpartanburgCounty,’ I said, having to pauseand remember what I’d said earlier.
‘And you?’ hesaid to Rosaleen. Shestared at thecopper Jell-O molds that hung on either side ofthe windowover thesink.
‘Same placeas Lily.’
‘What’s that burning?’said June. Smoke poured offthe griddle. The L-shaped pancake had burned to acrisp. June yanked thespatulafrommy fingers, scraped up
the mess,and dropped it into thetrash.
‘Howlong are you planning on staying?’ Neilasked. Junestared atme. Waiting. Her lips pinched tightalong her teeth.
‘Awhilelonger,’ Ianswered, looking over into the garbagec. L for Lily. Icould feelthe questions gathering in him, knewIcould not facethem.
‘I’mnot hungry,’ I said,and walked out the back door. Crossing the back porch, I heard Rosaleen say to him, ‘Have you registered yourselfto vote?’
On Sunday I thought theywould go to church, but no, they held aspecialservicein the pink house, and peoplecameto them. It wasa group called the Daughters of
Mary, whichAugust had organized. The Daughters ofMary started showing up in the parlor before 10:00 AM First was an old woman named Queenie and her grown
daughter, Violet. Theywere dressed alikein bright yellowskirtsand white blouses, though theywore different hats, at least. Nextcame Lunelle, Mabelee, and Cressie,
who wore the fanciest hats I’d ever laid eyes on. It turned out Lunelle was a hatmaker without the least bit of shyness. I’m talking about purple felt the size of a
sombrero with fake fruit on the back. That was Lunelle’s. Mabelee wore a creation of tiger fur wrapped with gold fringe, but it was Cressie who carried the day in a
crimson smokestack with black netting and ostrich feathers. If this was not enough, they wore clip-on earbobs of various colored rhinestones and circles of rouge on
their brown cheeks. I thought theywere beautiful. In addition to all these Daughters, it turned out Mary had one son besides Jesus, a man named Otis Hill, with stubby
teeth, in an oversize navy suit, so technically the group was the Daughtersand Son ofMary. He’d come with his wife, who was known to everyone as Sugar-Girl. She
wore a white dress, turquoise cotton gloves, and an emerald green turban on her head. August and June, hatless, gloveless, earbobless, looked practically povertystricken next to them, but May, good old May, had tied on a bright blue hat with the brimup on one side and down on the other. August had brought in chairs and
arranged themin a semicir- cle facing the wooden statue of Mary. When we were all seated, she lit the candle and June played the cello. We said the Hail Marys
together, Queenie and Violet moving strings ofwooden beads through their fingers. August stood up and said she was glad me and Rosaleenwere with them; then she
opened a Bible and read, ‘And Mary said…Behold, fromhenceforth all generations shallcallme blessed. For he that is mighty hath done to me great things…He hath
scattered the proud…He hath put down the mighty fromtheir seats,and exalted themoflowdegree. He hath filled the hungrywith good things;and therich he hath sent
empty away.’
Laying the Bible in herchair, she said, ‘It’s been a while since we’ve told the story ofOur Lady ofChains, and since we have visitors who’ve never heard the story
of our statue, I thought we’d tellitagain.’
Onething I was starting to understand was that August loved to tella good story.
‘Really, it’s good forall of us to hear itagain,’ shesaid.
‘Stories haveto betold or they die,and when they die, wecan’t remember who weare or whywe’re here.’
Cressie nodded, making the ostrich feathers wavethrough theair so you had theimpression ofareal bird in theroom.
‘That’s right. Tellthestory,’shesaid.August pulled herchaircloseto thestatue of black Mary and sat facing us. When she began, it didn’t sound likeAugust talking
atall but likesomebody talking through her, someonefromanother timeand place.All the while hereyes looked offtoward the window, likeshe was seeing the drama
play out in thesky.
‘Well,’ shesaid, ‘back in thetime ofslaves, when the people were beaten down and kept like property, they prayed every day and every night for deliverance.
‘On the islands near Charleston, they would go to the praise house and sing and pray, and every single time someone would ask the Lord to send themrescue. To
send themconsolation. To send themfreedom.’
I could tell she had repeated those opening lines a thousand times, that she was saying them the exact way she’d heard them coming from the lips of some old
woman, who’d heard themfromthelips ofan even older one, the way they came out likeasong, with rhythms that rocked us to and fro tillwe had left the premisesand
were, ourselves, on theislands ofCharleston looking for rescue.
‘One day,’August said, ‘a slave named Obadiahwas loading bricks onto a boat that would sail down theAshley River, when he saw somethingwashed up on the
bank. Coming closer, he saw it was the wooden figure ofa woman. Her bodywas growing out ofa block ofwood, a black womanwith herarmlifted outand her fist
balled up.’
At this pointAugust stood up and struck the pose herself. She looked just like the statue standing there, her right armraised and her hand clutched into a fist. She
stayed likethat forafewseconds while wesat, spellbound.
‘Obadiah pulled the figure out of the water,’she went on, ‘and struggled to set her upright. Then he remembered how they’d asked the Lord to send themrescue.
To send themconsolation. To send themfreedom. Obadiah knewthe Lord had sent this figure, but he didn’t knowwho she was.
‘He knelt down in the marshmud before herand heard her voicespeak plain as day in his heart. Shesaid, ‘It’sallright. I’mhere. I’ll betaking care of you now.’
‘This storywas ten times better thanBeatrix the nun. August glided back and forth across theroomas shespoke.
‘Obadiah tried to pick up the waterlogged woman who God had sent to take care of them, but she was too heavy, so he went and got two more slaves, and
between themthey carried her to the praise houseand set her on the hearth.
‘By thetimethe next Sunday came, everyone had heard about thestatue washing up fromtheriver, howit had spoken to Obadiah. The praise house was filled with
peoplespilling out the doorand sitting on the windowledges. Obadiah told themhe knewthe Lord God had sent her, but he didn’t knowwho she was.’
‘He didn’t know who she was!’cried Sugar-Girl, breaking in to the story. Then all the Daughters of Mary broke loose, saying over and over, ‘Not one of them
knew.’
I looked over at Rosaleen, who I hardly recognized for the way she leaned forward in her chair, chanting along with them. When everything had quieted down,
Augustsaid, ‘Now, the oldest oftheslaves wasa woman named Pearl. She walked with astick,and when shespoke,everyonelistened.
She got to her feetand said, ‘This hereis the mother ofJesus.’
‘Everyone knewthe mother ofJesus was named Mary, and that she’d seen suffering ofevery kind. That she was strong and constantand had a mother’s heart.And
hereshe was, sent to themon thesame waters that had brought themherein chains. Itseemed to themshe kneweverything they suffered.’
I stared at thestatue, feeling thefractured placeinmy heart.
‘And so,’August said, ‘the people cried and danced and clapped their hands. Theywent one at a time and touched their hands to her chest, wanting to grab on to
thesolacein her heart.
‘They did this every Sunday in the praise house, dancing and touching her chest, and eventually they painted a red heart on her breast so the people would have a
heart to touch.
‘Our Lady filled their hearts with fearlessness and whispered to themplans ofescape. The bold ones fled, finding their way north, and those who didn’t lived with a
raised fist in their hearts. And ifever it grewweak, theywould only haveto touch her heartagain.
‘She grew so powerfulshe became known even to the master. One day he hauled her off on a wagon and chained her in the carriage house. But then, without any
human help, she escaped during the night and made her way back to the praise house. The master chained her in the barn fifty times, and fifty times she loosed the
chainsand went home. Finally he gave up and let her stay there.’
Theroomgrewquietas Auguststood therea minute, letting everything sink in. When shespokeagain, sheraised herarms out beside her.
‘The peoplecalled her Our Lady ofChains. They called her that not becauseshe worechains…’
‘Not becauseshe worechains,’ the Daughterschanted.
‘They called her Our Lady ofChains becauseshe brokethem.’
June wedged thecello between her legsand played ‘AmazingGrace,’and the Daughters ofMary got to their feetand swayed together likecolorfulseaweed on the
ocean floor. I thought this was the grand finale, but no, Juneswitched over to the piano and banged outajazzed-up version of‘Go TellIt on the Mountain.’
That’s whenAugust started a conga line. She danced over to Lunelle, who latched on to August’s waist. Cressie hooked on to Lunelle, followed by Mabelee, and
offtheywentaround theroom, causingCressieto grab hold of hercrimson hat. When they swung back by, Queenieand Violet joined them, then Sugar-Girl. I wanted
to be part of it, too, but I only watched, and so did Rosaleen and Otis. June seemed to play faster and faster. I fanned my face, trying to get a little air, feeling lightheaded. When the dance ended, the Daughters stood panting in a halfcircle before Our Lady of Chains, and what they did next took my breath away. One at a time
they went and touched the statue’s fading red heart. Queenie and her daughter went together and rubbed their palms against the wood. Lunelle pressed her fingers to
Mary’s heart, then kissed each one of themin a slow, deliberate way, a way that brought tears to my eyes. Otis pressed his forehead to the heart, standing there the
longest time ofthemall, head to heart, like he was filling up hisempty tank. June kept playingwhile each ofthemcame, until there was only Rosaleen and me left. May
nodded to Juneto keep onwith the musicand took Rosaleen’s hand, pulling her to Our Lady ofChains, so evenRosaleen got to touchMary’s heart. I wanted to touch
her vanishing red heart, too, as much as anything I’d ever wanted. As I rose frommy chair, my head was stillswimming some. I walked toward black Mary with my
hand lifted. But justas I was about to reach her, June stopped playing. She stopped right in the middle ofthe song, and I was left in the silence withmy hand stretched
out. Drawing it back, I looked around me, and it was likeseeing everything through atrain’s thick window.Ablur passed before me.Amovingwave ofcolor. Iamnot
one of you, I thought. My body felt numb. I thought how nice it would be to grow smaller and smaller—until I was a dot of nothing. I heard August scolding, ‘June,
what got into you?’ but her voice was so distant. I called to the Lady of Chains, but maybe I wasn’t really saying her name out loud, only hearing myselfcall on the
inside. That’s the last I remember. Her name echoing through the empty spaces. When I woke, I was lying onAugust’s bed across the hallwith an ice-cold washcloth
folded over my forehead and August and Rosaleen staring down at me. Rosaleen had pulled up the skirt of her dress and was fanningme with it, showingmost of her
thighs.
‘Since when have you started fainting?’she said, and sat down on the edge of the bed, causing me to roll into her side. She scooped me into her arms. For some
reason thiscaused my chest to fillwithmoresadness than Icould bear,and I wrestled myselffree,claiming I needed a drink ofwater.
‘Maybeit was the heat,’ Augustsaid.
‘I should’veturned on thefans. Itmust’ve been ninety degrees in there.’
‘I’mallright,’I told them, but to tell thetruth, I was bewildered at myself. I felt I’d stumbled upon an amazing secret—it was possibleto close youreyesand exit life
withoutactually dying.You just had to faint. Only I didn’t knowhowto makeit happen, howto pull the plug so Icould drain awaywhen I needed to. My fainting spell
had broken up the Daughters of Mary and sent May to the wailing wall. June had gone upstairs to her roomand locked the door, while the Daughters huddled in the
kitchen. We chalked it up to heat. Heat, we said. Heat would make a person do strange things. You should have seen howAugust and Rosaleen fussed over me the
rest of the evening. Youwant some root beer, Lily? How abouta feather pillow? Here, swallow this spoon of honey. We sat in the den, where I ate supper offa tray,
which was a privilege in itself. June was still in her room, not answeringAugust’s calls at the door, and May, who wasn’t allowed near the TV because she’d already
spent way too much time today at the wall, was in the kitchen clipping recipes fromMcCall’s magazine. On the televisionMr. Cronkite said theywere going to send a
rocketship to the moon.
‘On July twenty-eighth, the United States ofAmerica will launch Ranger Seven fromCape Kennedy, Florida,’ he said. It was going to take a 253,665-mile flight
beforeitcrash-landed onto the moon. The whole point was to take pictures ofthesurfaceand send themback.
‘Well, baby Jesus,’ said Rosaleen.
‘Arocket to the moon.’
Augustshook her head.
‘Next they’ll be walking around up there.’ We had allthought President Kennedywas off his rocker when he declared we’d land a man on the moon. The Sylvan newspaper had called ita‘Luna-tic Vision.’
I took the article to class for the current-events bulletin board. We all said, Aman on the moon. Right. But you can never underestimate the power ofcutthroat
competition. We wanted to beat the Russians—that was whatmadethe world go around for us. Nowit looked like we would. Augustcut offthe TVset.
‘I need someair.’ We allwent, Rosaleen and August holding on to my elbows in case I started to keel over again. It was the in-between time, before day leaves and night comes, a
timeI’ve never been partialto because ofthesadness that lingers in thespace between going and coming.August gazed at theskywherethe moonwas rising, largeand
ghostly silver.
‘Look at her good, Lily,’ shesaid, ’
‘cause you’reseeing theend ofsomething.’
‘Yes, you are, because as long as people have been on this earth, the moon has been a mystery to us. Think about it. She is strong enough to pull the oceans, and
when she dies away, she always comes back again. My mama used to tell me Our Lady lived on the moon and that I should dance when her face was bright and
hibernate when it was dark.’
August stared at the sky a long moment and then, turning toward the house, said, ‘Now it won’t ever be the same, not after they’ve landed up there and walked
around on her.
She’ll bejust one more big science project.’
I thought about the dream I’d had that night Rosaleen and I slept by the pond, how the moon had cracked to pieces. August disappeared into the house, and
Rosaleen headed for hercot in the honey house, but I stayed on and stared at thesky, imaginingRanger 7 blasting away for it. I knewone day I would go back into the
parlor when no one was around and touch the Lady’s heart. Then I would showAugust the picture ofmymother and see if the moon broke loose and fell out of the
sky.
I
Chapter Seven
Howdid beesever becomeequated with sex? They do not liveariotous sex lifethemselves. Ahivesuggestscloister morethan bordello. —The QueenMust Die:And Other Affairs ofBeesand Men
jumped every timeI heard asiren. It might have been an ambulance offin the distance ora policechase on television—it didn’t matter. Part ofme wasalways braced
for T. Ray or Mr. Shoe Gaston to drive up and end my charmed life. We had been at August’s house eight whole days. I didn’t know how long black Mary could
keep the curtain drawn. On Monday morning, July 3, I was walking back to the honey house after breakfast when I noticed a strange black Ford parked in the
driveway. I lost my breath for a moment, till I remembered Zach was coming back to work today. It would be me and August and Zach. I’mnot proud of it, but I
resented theintrusion. He was not what Iexpected. I found himinside holding a honey drizzlelikea microphone, singing, ‘I found my thrill onBlueberryHill.’
I watched unseen fromthe doorway, not making asound, but when helaunched into ‘Viva Las Vegas,’slinging his hipsaround Elvis-style, I broke out laughing. He
whirled around, knocking overatray of brood frames, whichmadea great bigmessall over thefloor.
‘I was justsinging,’ hesaid, likethis was news to me.
‘Who are you anyway?’
‘Lily,’ I said.
‘I’mstayingwithAugustand themfora while.’
‘I’mZacharyTaylor,’ hesaid.
‘ZacharyTaylor wasa president,’ I told him.
‘Yeah, so I’ve heard.’
Hefished outa dogtag suspended on achain under his shirtand held it up to my nose.
‘Seeright there. ZacharyLincolnTaylor.’
Hesmiled then,and I sawhe had a one-side dimple. It’safeaturethat hasalways gotten to me. He wentand gotatoweland cleaned up thefloor.
‘August told meabout you being hereand helping us out, butshe didn’tsay anything about you being…white.’
‘Yep, I’mwhite,allright,’ I said.
‘Whiteascan be.’
There was nothing white about Zachary Lincoln Taylor. Even the whites of his eyes weren’t exactly white. He had broad shoulders and a narrow waist and shortcropped hair like most of the Negro boys wore, but it was his face I couldn’t help staring at. If he was shocked over me beingwhite, I was shocked over himbe- ing
handsome.Atmy schooltheymadefun ofcolored people’s lipsand noses. I myself had laughed at thesejokes, hoping to fit in. NowI wished Icould pen aletter to my
school to beread at opening assembly that would tell themhowwrongwe’d all been.You should see Zachary Taylor, I’d say. I wondered howAugustcould forget to
tell hima thing like the fact that I was white. She’d told me plenty about him. I knew she was his godmother. That his daddy had left himwhen he was small, that his
mama worked as a lunchroomlady at the same school where June taught. He was about to be a junior at the black high school, where he made allA’s and played
halfback on thefootball team. She’d said heran likethe wind, whichmight be his ticket to acollege up north. This had struck meas better than I would manage, sinceI
was probably headed for beauty school now. I said, ‘August went out to the Satterfield farmto check on some hives. She said I should help you in here. What do you
wantmeto do?’
‘Grab someframes fromthe hive boxes over thereand help meload the uncapper, I guess.’
‘So who do you like best, Fats Domino or Elvis?’ Iasked, dropping in thefirst frame.
‘Miles Davis,’ hesaid.
‘I don’t knowwho that is.’
‘Ofcourse you don’t. But he’s the best trumpet player in the world. I’d giveanything to play like him.’
‘Would you give up football?’
‘Howdo you knowI play football?’
‘I knowthings,’ I said,and smiled at him.
‘Ican seethat.’
He was trying not to smile back. I thought, We’re going to befriends. Heflipped theswitch,and theextractor started to spin, building speed.
‘So howcome you’restaying here?’
‘Meand Rosaleen are on our way to Virginiato live withmy aunt. My daddy died in atractoraccident, and I haven’t had a mother sinceI was little, so I’mtrying to
get to my family up there beforeI get put in an orphanage or something.’
‘But howcome you’re here?’
‘Oh, youmean at August’s. We were hitchhiking and got let outat Tiburon. We knocked onAugust’s door,and she gave usa bed. That’s it.’
He nodded likethis madesome kind ofactualsense.
‘Howlong have youworked here?’ Iasked, happy to changethesubject.
‘Allthrough high school. Icomeafter schoolwhen it’s not footballseason,every Saturday and allsummer. I boughtacar with the money I madelast year.’
‘That Ford out there?’
‘Yeah, it’sa‘59 Ford Fairlane,’ hesaid. Heflipped theswitch on theextractoragain,and the machine groaned whileitcameto astop.
‘Come on, I’llshowyou.’
Icould see my facein thesurface ofit. I figured hestayed up nights polishing it with his undershirts. I walked along giving it the white-gloveinspection.
‘You can teachmeto drive,’ I said.
‘Not in thiscar.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because you look likethe kind of girlwho’llwreck something for sure.’
I turned to face him, ready to defend myself,and sawhe was grinning. And there was the one-side dimpleagain.
‘For sure,’ hesaid.
‘Wreck something for sure.’
Every day Zach and I worked in the honey house. Augustand Zach had already extracted most ofthe honey fromher bee yards, but there were stillseveralstacks
ofsupers on pallets sitting around. Weran the warmerand caught the wax in atin tub, then loaded theframes into theextractorand filtered the honey through brandnew
nylon hose. August liked to keep a little pollen in her honey because it was good for people, so we saw to that, too. Sometimes we broke off pieces ofcomb and
pushed themdown into thejars before wefilled them.You had to makesuretheywere newcombs with no brood eggs in them, since nobodywanted to have baby bee
larvae in their honey. And if we weren’t doing all that, we were filling candle molds with beeswax and washingmason jars tillmy hands turned stiffas corn husk from
detergent. The only part of the day I dreaded was dinner, when I had to be around June. You’d think anybody who played music for dying people would be a nicer
person. Icouldn’t understand why sheresented meso much. Somehowevenme beingwhiteand imposing on their hospitality didn’tseemenough reason.
‘Howarethingscomingwith you, Lily?’ she’d say every nightat thetable. Likeshe’d rehearsed this in the mirror. I’d say, ‘Thingsarecoming fine. And howarethey
comingwith you, June?’
She would glanceat August, who would befollowing allthis likeshe was overcome with interest.
‘Fine,’June would say. Having gotten that out of the way, we would shake out our napkins and do our best to ignore each other the rest of the meal. I knew that
August was trying to correct June’s rudeness toward me, but I wanted to say to her, Do you think meand June Boatwright givea damn howeach other iscoming?Just
give up. One nightafter the HailMarys, Augustsaid, ‘Lily, if youwish to touchOur Lady’s heart, you’re welcome, isn’tshe, June?’
I glanced atJune, who gave meaforced smile.
‘Maybesome other time,’I said. I’mhereto tell you, ifI was dying onmy cot in the honey houseand the only thing thatcould save me was June’schange of heart, I
would meet my death and shoot straight to heaven. Or maybe hell. I wasn’t even sure anymore. The best mealwas lunch, which Zach and I ate under the cool of the
pine trees. May fixed us bologna sandwiches nearly every single day. We could also count on candlestick salad, whichmeant halfa banana standing up in a pineapple
slice.
‘Let me light your candle,’she’d say, and strike an imaginarymatch. Then she’d fasten a bottled cherry on the tip of the banana with a toothpick. Like Zach and I
were still in kindergarten. But we’d go along with her, acting allexcited over her lighting the banana. For dessert we crunched cubes of lime Kool-Aid, which she’d
frozen in icetrays. One daywesat on the grassafter lunch, listening to the wind snap thesheets Rosaleen had hung on theclothesline.
‘What’s your favoritesubject in school?’ Zach asked.
‘English.’
‘I bet you liketo writethemes,’ hesaid, rolling hiseyes.
‘Asa matter offact I do. I was planning on being a writerand anEnglish teacher inmy sparetime.’
‘Was planning?’ hesaid.
‘I don’t think I have much ofafuture now, being an orphan.’ What I meant was being afugitivefromthelaw. Considering thestate ofthings, I didn’t knowifI’d even get back to high school. Hestudied his fingers. Icould smell
the sharp scent of his sweat. He had patches of honey on his shirt, which were attract- ing a horde of flies and causing himto swat incessantly. After a while he said,
‘Meeither.’
‘You either what?’
‘I don’t knowifI’ll have much ofafutureeither.’
‘Why not? You’re notan orphan.’
‘No,’ hesaid.
‘I’ma Negro.’
I feltembarrassed.
‘Well, you could play footballforacollegeteamand then bea professional player.’
‘Why is itsports is the only thingwhite peoplesee us being successfulat?I don’t want to play football,’ hesaid.
‘I wanna bealawyer.’
‘That’s fine withme,’ I said,alittleannoyed.
‘I’vejust never heard ofa Negro lawyer, that’sall. You’ve got to hear ofthesethings before you can imaginethem.’
‘Bullshit. You gottaimagine what’s never been.’
Iclosed my eyes.
‘Allright then, I’mimagining a Negro lawyer.You area Negro PerryMason. Peoplearecoming to you fromall over thestate, wrong-accused people, and you get
at thetruth at the very lastminute by tricking therealcriminal on the witness stand.’
‘Yeah,’ hesaid, ‘I bust theirass with thetruth.’ When helaughed, his tongue was grass green fromKool-Aid. I started calling himZach theass-busting lawyer.
‘Oh, look who’s here, Zach the ass-busting lawyer,’ I’d say. It was along about this point Rosaleen started asking me what did I think I was doing—auditioning
myselfto getadopted by thecalendar sisters? Shesaid I was living in a dreamworld.
‘Dreamworld’ became her favoritetwo words.
It was living in a dreamworld to pretend we had a regular life when there was a manhunt going on, to think we could stay here forever, to believe I would find out
anything worth knowing about mymother. Every time I shot back, What’s wrong with living in a dreamworld? And she’d say, You have to wake up. One afternoon
when I wasalonein the honey house, June wandered in looking for August. Or so shesaid. Shecrossed herarms over herchest.
‘So,’ shesaid, ‘you’ve been here—what? Two weeks now?’
Howobviouscan you get?‘Look, if youwant us to leave, meand Rosaleenwill be on our way,’ I said.
‘I’llwrite my aunt,and she’llsend us bus money.’
Sheraised hereyebrows.
‘I thought you didn’t remember youraunt’s last name,and nowyou knowher nameand heraddress.’
‘Actually, I knewitallalong,’ I said.
‘I was just hoping foralittletime before we had to leave.’
Itseemed like her facesoftened some when I said that, but itcould’ve beenwishfulthinking onmy part.
‘Heavens to Betsy, what’s this talk about you leaving?’ said August, standing in the doorway. Neither one of us had seen hercomein. She gaveJunea hard look.
‘Nobodywants you to leave, Lily, till you’re good and ready.’
Standing beside August’s desk, I fidgeted with astack of papers. Junecleared her throat.
‘Well, I need to get back and practice,’ shesaid,and breezed out the door. August walked overand sat down in her desk chair.
‘Lily, you can talk to me. You knowthat, don’t you?’ When I didn’tanswer, she caught my hand and drewme to her, pullingme right down onto her lap. It was not mattress deep like Rosaleen’s but thin and angular. I
wanted nothing more than to come clean with her. Go pull my bag fromunderneath the cot and bring out my mother’s things. I wanted to produce the black Mary
pictureand say, This belonged to mymother, thisexact same, identical picture you put on your honey jars.And it has Tiburon, SouthCarolina, written on the back, so I
knowshe must’ve been here. I wanted to hold up her photograph and say, Have you ever seen her? Take your time now. Think carefully. But I hadn’t yet pressed my
hand to the black Mary’s heart in the parlor, and I was too afraid to say all this without having done at least that. I leaned against August’s chest, pushing aside my
secret wanting, too afraid she’d say, No, I never sawthis woman inmy life. And that would bethat. Not knowing anything atallwas better. I struggled to my feet.
‘I guess I’ll go help in the kitchen.’
I crossed the yard withouta glance back. That night, when the darkness was weighed downwith singing crickets and Rosaleenwas snoring rightalongwith them, I
had myself a good cry. I couldn’t even say why. Just everything, I guess. Because I hated lying to August when she was so good to me. Because Rosaleen was
probably right about dreamworlds. Because I was pretty sure the Virgin Mary was not back there on the peach farmstanding in for me the way she’d stood in for
Beatrix. Neilcame over most evenings and sat with June in the parlor while the rest of us watched The Fugitive on television in the den. August said she wished the
fugitive would go ahead and find the one-armed man and get it over with. During commercials I pretended to go for waterand instead crept down the hall, whereI tried
to make out whatJuneand Neilweresaying.
‘I’d like you to tellme why not,’ I heard Neilsay oneevening. And June, ‘BecauseIcan’t.’
‘That’s notareason.’
‘Well, it’s the only oneI’ve got.’
‘Look, I’mnot gonna waitaround forever,’Neilsaid. I wasanticipatingwhat June would say to that, whenNeilcame through the door without warning and caught
me pressed against the wall listening to their most private sayings. He looked fora second like he might turnme over to June, but he left, banging the front door behind
him. I hightailed it back to the den, but not before I heard the beginnings ofa sob in June’s throat. One morningAugust sent Zach and me sixmiles out in the county to
bring in thelast ofthesupers to be harvested. Lord, it was hot, plus we had at least ten gnats per squareinch ofair. Zach drovethe honeywagon as fastas it would go,
whichwasabout thirtymilesan hour. The wind whipped my hairand flooded thetruck with a weedy, new-mown smell. Theroadsides werecovered with fresh-picked
cotton, blown fromthe trucks carrying it to the gin in Tiburon. Zach said the farmers had planted and harvested their cotton early this year because of the bollweevil.
Scattered along the highway, it looked forall the world likesnow, whichmade me wish fora blizzard to comecool things down. I went offinto a daydreamabout Zach
pulling the truck over because he couldn’t see to drive for the snow and us having a snowball fight, blasting each other with soft white snow cotton. I imagined us
building asnowcave, sleepingwith our bodies twined together to get warm, ourarmsand legs like black-andwhite braids. This last thought shocked my systemso bad
I shivered. I stuck my hands under my arms,and my sweat was ice-watercold.
‘You allright?’asked Zach.
‘Yeah, why?’
‘You’reshaking over there.’
‘I’mfine. I do thatsometimes.’
I turned away and looked out the window, where there was nothing but fields and now and then a falling-down wooden barn or some old, abandoned colored
house.
‘Howmuch further?’ I said in a way thatsuggested theexcursion could not be over too soon.
‘You upset or something?’
I refused to answer him, glaring instead through the dirty windshield. When we turned off the highway onto a beat-up dirt road, Zach said we were on property
belonging to Mr. Clayton Forrest, who kept Black Madonna Honey and beeswax candles in the waiting roomof his lawofficeso hiscustomerscould buy them. Part of
Zach’s job was going around to deliver fresh supplies of honey and candles to places thatsold themon consignment.
‘Mr. Forrest lets me pokearound his lawoffice,’ hesaid.
‘Uh-huh.’
‘Hetells meabout thecases he’s won.’ We hit a rut and bounced on the seat so hard our heads rammed into the truck roof, which for some reason flipped mymood upside down. I started to laugh like
somebodywas holdingme down ticklingmy armpits. The more my head slammed against thetruck, the worseit got, tillI was having one big, hilarious seizure. I laughed
the way May cried. At first Zach aimed for the ruts just to hear me, but then he got nervous because I couldn’t seemto stop. He cleared his throat and slowed way
down tillwe were bounce-free. Finally it drained out ofme, whatever it was. I remembered the pleasure of fainting that day during the Daughters ofMarymeeting and
thought now how much I would like to keel over right here in the truck. I envied turtles their shells, how they could disappear at will. I was conscious of Zach’s
breathing, his shirt pulled across his chest, one armdraped on the steeringwheel. The hard, dark look ofit. The mystery of his skin. It was foolish to think some things
were beyond happening, even being attracted to Negroes. I’d honestly thought such a thing couldn’t happen, the way water could not run uphill or salt could not taste
sweet. Alaw of nature. Maybe it was a simple matter of being attracted to what I couldn’t have. Or maybe desire kicked in when it pleased without noticing the rules
we lived and died by. You gotta imagine what’s never been, Zach had said. He stopped the honeywagon beside a cluster of twenty hives tucked in a thicket of trees,
where the bees could have shade in the summer and shelter fromthe wind through the winter. Bees were more fragile than I ever imagined. If it wasn’t mites ruining
them, it was pesticides or terrible weather. He climbed outand dragged a load ofequipment offthe back ofthe truck—helmets, extra supers, fresh brood frames, and
the smoker, which he handed me to light. I moved through camphorweed and wild azalea, stepping over fire-ant mounds and swinging the smoker while he lifted the
lids off the hives and peered inside looking for capped frames. He moved like a person with a genuine love of bees. I could not believe how gentle and softhearted he
could be. One oftheframes helifted out leaked honey thecolor of plums.
‘It’s purple!’ I said.
‘When the weather turns hotand theflowers dry up, the bees startsucking elderberry. Itmakesa purple honey. People will pay two dollarsajar for purple honey.’
He dipped his finger into the comb and, lifting my veil, brought it close to my lips. I opened my mouth, let his finger slide in, sucking it clean. The sheerest smile
brushed his lips, and heat rushed up my body. He bent toward me. I wanted himto lift back my veiland kiss me, and I knew he wanted to do it, too, by the way he
fixed hiseyes onmine. Westayed likethat while bees swirled around our heads with asound likesizzling bacon, asound that no longer registered as danger. Danger, I
realized, was a thing you got used to. But instead of kissingme, he turned to the next hive and went right on with his work. The smoker had gone out. I followed behind him, and neither of us spoke. Westacked thefilled supers onto thetruck likethecat had our tongues, and neither of us said a word tillwe were back in the honey
truck passing the city limits sign. TIBURON, POPULATION 6,502 Home of Willifred Marchant ‘Who is Willifred Marchant?’ I said, desperate to break the silence
and get things back to normal.
‘Youmean you’ve never heard ofWillifred Marchant?’ hesaid.
‘Sheis only a world-famous writer who wrotethree Pulitzer Prize booksabout the deciduous trees ofSouthCarolina.’
I giggled.
‘They didn’t win any Pulitzer Prizes.’
‘You better shut your mouth, because in Tiburon, Willifred Marchant’s books are way up there with the Bible. We have an official Willifred Marchant Day every
year,and theschools hold tree-planting ceremonies. Shealwayscomes wearing a big strawhatand carrying a basket ofrose petals, which shetosses to thechildren.’
‘She does not,’ I said.
‘Oh, yes. Miss Willieis veryweird.’
‘Deciduous treesarean interesting topic, I guess. But I myselfwould rather writeabout people.’
‘Oh, that’s right, I forgot,’ hesaid.
‘You’re planning on being a writer. You and Miss Willie.’
‘You act like you don’t believeIcan do it.’
‘I didn’tsay that.’
‘You implied it.’
‘Whatare you talking about?I did not.’
I turned to concentrate on things beyond the window. The Masonic Lodge, Hot Buy Used Cars, the Firestone Tire store. Zach braked at a stop sign next to the
Dixie Cafe, which sat practically in the front yard ofthe Tri-County Livestock Company, and for some reason this made me furious. What I wanted to know was how
people ate breakfast, lunch, and dinner with the smell ofcows—and worse—overwhelming their nose buds. I wanted to screamout the window, ‘Eat your damned
breakfast grits somewhere else, why don’t you? There’s cow shit in the air!’ The way people lived their lives, settling for grits and cow shit, made me sick. My eyes
stung allaround thesockets. Zach crossed theintersection. Icould feel hiseyes boreinto the back ofmy head.
‘You mad at me?’ he said. I meant to say, Yes, I most certainly am, because you think I will never amount to anything. But what came out of my mouth was
something else,and it wasembarrassingly stupid.
‘I will never throw rose petals to anybody,’ I said, and then I broke down, the kind ofcrying where you’re sucking air and making heaving sounds like a person
drowning. Zach pulled over on theside oftheroad, saying, ‘Holymoly. What’s the matter?’
He wrapped one armaround me and pulled me across the seat to him. I’d thought the whole thingwas about my lost future, the one Mrs. Henry encouraged me to
believe in by plyingme with books and summer reading lists and big talk about scholarships to Columbia College, but sitting there close to Zach, I knew I was crying
because he had that oneoside dimple I loved, because every time I looked at himI got a hot, funny feeling that circulated frommy waist to my kneecaps, because I’d
been going along beingmy normal girlselfand the next thing I knewI’d passed through a membraneinto a place of desperation. I wascrying, I realized, for Zach. I laid
my head on his shoulderand wondered howhecould stand me. In oneshortmorning I had exhibited insanelaughter, hidden lust, pissy behavior, self-pity,and hysterical
crying. IfI’d been trying to showhimmyworstsides, Icould not have donea better job than this. He gave measqueezeand spokeinto my hair.
‘It’s gonna beallright. You’re gonna beafine writer one day.’
I sawhimglance behind us, then across theroad.
‘Now, you go back over to your side of the truck and wipe your face,’ he said, and handed me a floor rag that smelled like gasoline. When we got to the honey
house, it was deserted except for Rosa- leen, who was gathering up her clothes so she could move up to May’s room. I’d been gone two slimhours, and our whole
living arrangement had been overturned.
‘Howcome you get to sleep over there?’ Iasked her. ’
‘Cause May gets scared at night by herself.’
Rosaleenwas going to sleep in theextratwin bed, get the bottomdrawer ofMay’s dresser for her stuff,and havethe bathroomat her fingertips.
‘Ican’t believe you’releavingme over here bymyself!’ Icried. Zach grabbed the hand truck and wheeled it outas fastas hecould to start unloading thesupers from
the honeywagon. I think he’d had enough femaleemotion for thetime being.
‘I’mnot leaving you. I’mgetting a mattress,’she said, and dropped her toothbrush and the Red Rose snuffinto her pocket. I crossed my arms over my blouse that
was still damp fromallthecrying I’d been doing.
‘Finethen, go on. I don’tcare.’
‘Lily, thatcot is bad onmy back.And if you ain’t noticed, thelegs on itareall bent out ofwhack now.Another week and it’s gonnacollapse on thefloor.You’ll be
fine withoutme.’
My chestclosed up. Fine without her. Was she out of her mind?‘I don’t wanna wake up fromthe dreamworld,’I said, and midsentence my voicecracked, and the
words twisted and turned inmymouth.
Shesat on thecot, thecot I nowhated with a passion becauseit had driven her to May’s room. She pulled me down beside her.
‘I knowyou don’t, but I’ll be here when you do. I mightsleep up thereinMay’s room, but I’mnot going anywhere.’
She patted my knee like old times. She patted, and neither of us said anything. We could’ve been back in the policeman’s car riding to jail for how I felt. Like I
would not exist without her patting hand. I followed Rosaleen as she carried her few things over to the pink house, intending to inspect her new room. We climbed the
steps onto the screen porch. August sat on the porch swing that was suspended fromtwo chains in the ceiling. She was rocking back and forth, having her orangeade
break and reading her new book, which she’d gotten fromthe bookmobile. I turned my head to read the title. Jane Eyre. May was on the other side of the porch
running clothes through the rubber rollers on the wringer washingmachine. Abrand-new pink LadyKenmore, which they kept out on the porch because there was no
roomin the kitchen. In television commercials the womanwho worked the LadyKenmore wore an evening gown and seemed to be enjoying herself. May just looked
hotand tired. Shesmiled as Rosaleenwent bywith her things.
‘Are you okay with Rosaleen moving over here?’August said, propping the book on her stomach. She took a sip of her drink, then ran her hand across the cold
moisture on the glassand pressed her palmto thefront of her neck.
‘I guess so.’
‘Maywillsleep better withRosaleen in there,’ shesaid.
‘Won’t you, May?’
I glanced over at May, but she didn’t seemto hear over the washer. Suddenly the last thing I wanted was to follow Rosaleen and watch her tuck her clothes into
May’s dresser. I looked at August’s book.
‘Whatare you reading about?’ Iasked, thinking I was making casualconversation, but boy, was I wrong.
‘It’s about a girlwhose mother died when she was little,’she said. Then she looked at me in a way that made my stomach tip over, the same way it’d tipped over
when she’d told meabout Beatrix.
‘What happens to the girl?’ Iasked, trying to make my voicesteady.
‘I’ve only started the book,’ shesaid.
‘But right nowshe’s just feeling lostand sad.’
I turned and looked out toward the garden, where June and Neilwere picking tomatoes. I stared at themwhile the crank on the washer squeaked. I could hear the
clothes falling into the basin behind the rollers. She knows, were thought. She knows who I am. I stretched out my arms like I was pushing back invisible walls ofair
and, looking down, caught sight ofmy shadow on the floor, this skinny girlwithwild haircurling up in the humidity, with herarms flung outand her palmserect like she
was trying to stop traffic in both directions. I wanted to bend down and kiss her, for how smalland determined she looked. When I glanced back atAugust, she was
stillstaring atme, likesheexpected meto say something.
‘Well, I guess I’ll go see Rosaleen’s newbed,’I said.August picked up her book, and that was that. The moment passed, and so did thefeeling that she knewwho
I was. I mean, it didn’t make sense: how could August Boatwright know anything about me? It was around this time that June and Neil started a first-class fight out
therein thetomato garden. Juneshouted something,and heshouted back.
‘Uh-oh,’ said August. She put down the book and stood up.
‘Why can’t you just let it be?’ yelled June.
‘Why does italwayscome back to this? Get this through your head:I’mnot gettingmarried. Not yesterday, not today, not next year!’
‘Whatare you scared of?’ Neilsaid.
‘For your information, I’mnotscared ofanything.’
‘Well, then, you’rethe mostselfish bitch Iever met,’ hesaid,and started walking toward hiscar.
‘Oh, Lord,’ said August under her breath.
‘Howdare you callmethat!’ said June.
‘You come back here. Don’t you walk off when I’mtalking to you!’ Neil kept right on walking, didn’t look over his shoulder once. Zach, I noticed, had stopped
loading supers onto the hand truck and watched, shaking his head like hecouldn’t believe he was witnessing another scene where people’s worstsidescome out.
‘If you leave now, don’t plan on coming back!’she yelled. Neilclimbed into his car, and suddenly June came runningwith tomatoes in her hands. She reared back
and threwone, splat! right into the windshield. Thesecond onelanded on the door handle.
‘Don’t you come back!’she yelled as Neil drove off. Trailing tomato juice. May sank down onto thefloor, crying and looking so hurt insideIcould almost seesoft,
red places up under her rib bones. August and I walked her out to her wall, and for the umpteenth time she wrote June and Neil on a scrap of paper and wedged it
between the rocks. We spent the rest of the day working on the supers that Zach and I had hauled in. Stacked six high, they made a miniature skyline all through the
honey house.August said it looked like Bee City in there. Weran twelveextractor loads through the wholesystem—all the way fromthe uncapping knifeto the bottling
tank. August didn’t like her honey to sitaround waiting too long, becausetheflavor got lost. We had two days to finish it up, shesaid. Period. At least we didn’t haveto
store the honey in a special hot roomto keep it fromcrystallizing, because every roomwe had was a hot room. Sometimes Carolina heat turned out to be good for
something. Just when I thought we were done for the day and could go eat dinnerand say ourevening prayers with the beads, no, we were just beginning. August had
us load up theempty supersand haulthemout to the woods so the beescould comeand do the big cleanup. She would notstore her supers for the winter untilthe bees
had sucked out the last remaining bits of honey fromthe combs. She said that was because honey remnants attracted roaches. But really, I’msure it was because she
loved throwing a little end-of-the-year party for her bees, seeing them descend on the supers like they’d discovered honey heaven. The whole time we worked, I
marveled at howmixed up people got when itcameto love. I myself, for instance. It seemed likeI was nowthinking ofZach fortyminutes out ofevery hour, Zach, who
wasan impossibility. That’s what I told myselffive hundred times:impossibility. Ican tell you this much:the word isa great big log thrown on thefires oflove. That night
it felt strange to be in the honey house bymyself. I missed Rosaleen’s snoring the way you’d miss the sound of ocean waves after you’ve gotten used to sleeping with
them. I didn’t realize how it had comforted me. Quietness has a strange, spongy humthat can nearly break your eardrums. I didn’t know if it was the emptiness, the
stifling heat, or the fact it was only nine o’clock, but I couldn’t settle into sleep despite how tired I was. I peeled offmy top and my underwear and lay on the damp
sheets. I liked the feel of nudeness. It wasa smooth, oiled feeling on the sheets, a set-free feeling. I imagined then that I heard a car pull into the driveway. I imagined it
was Zach, and the thought of himmoving in the night just outside the honey house caused my breath to speed up. I rose and slipped across the dark space to the wall
mirror. Pearled light poured through the openwindowbehind me, molding to my skin, givingmeatrue halo, not justaround my head butacross my shoulders, alongmy
ribsand thighs. I was thelast person to deservea halo, but I studied theeffect,cuppingmy hands under my breasts, studyingmy pinky-brown nipples, thethin curves of
mywaist, every softand glowing turn. It was thefirst timeI’d felt like morethan ascraggly girl. Iclosed my eyes, and the balloon full ofcraving finally burst open inmy
chest, and when it did, wouldn’t you know—one minute I was dreaming of Zach and the next I was hungering for my mother, imagining her calling my name, saying,
Lily, girl. You are my flower. When I turned to the window, there was no one there. Not that I had expected there would be. Two days later, after we had run
ourselves into the ground harvesting the rest of the honey, Zach showed up with the prettiest notebook—green with rosebuds on the cover. He met me coming out of
the pink house.
‘This is for you,’ hesaid.
‘So you can geta head start on your writing.’
That’s when I knewI would never find a better friend than Zachary Taylor. I threwmy armsaround himand leaned into hischest. He madeasound like Whoa, but
after a second his arms folded around me, and we stayed like that, in a true embrace. He moved his hands up and down my back, till I was almost dizzy. Finally he
unwound my arms and said, ‘Lily, I like you better than any girl I’ve ever known, but you have to understand, there are people who would kill boys like me for even
looking at girls like you.’
Icouldn’t restrainmyselffromtouching his face, the place where his dimplecaved into his skin.
‘I’msorry,’ I said.
‘Yeah. Me, too,’ he said. For days I carried the notebook everywhere. I wrote constantly. Amade-up story about Rosaleen losing eighty-five pounds, looking so
sleek nobody could pick her out ofa police lineup. One aboutAugust driving a honeymobile around, similar to the bookmobile, only she had jars of honey to dispense
instead of books. My favorite, though, was one about Zach becoming the ass-busting lawyer and getting his own television show like Perry Mason. I read it to him
during lunch one day,and helistened better than achild atstory hour.
‘Move over, Willifred Marchant’ wasall hesaid.
A
Chapter Eight
Honeybees depend not only on physicalcontact with thecolony, butalso requireits socialcompanionship and support. Isolatea honeybeefromher sistersand she
willsoon die. —The QueenMust Die:And Other Affairs ofBeesand Men
ugust toretheJuly pagefromthe wallcalendar that hung by her desk in the honey house. I wanted to tell her that technically it was stillJuly for five more days, but I
figured she knew already. It wasa simple case of her wanting July over with so she could start intoAugust, her specialmonth. Just like June was June’s month and
May belonged to May. August had explained to me how when theywere children and their specialmonth came around, their mother excused themfromhouse chores
and let themeat all their favorite foods even if it wrecked their teeth and stay up a full hour later at night doing whatever their heart desired. August said her heart had
desired to read books, so the whole month she got to prop on thesofain the quiet oftheliving roomreading after her sisters went to bed. To listen to August talk, it had
been the highlight of her youth. After hearing this, I’d spenta good amount oftime trying to think up whichmonth I would have liked to have been named for. I picked
October, as it isa goldenmonthwith better-than- average weather, and my initials would be O. O. for October Owens, whichwould make an interestingmonogram. I
pictured myselfeating three-tiered chocolate cake for breakfast throughout the entire month, staying up an hour after bedtime writing high-caliber stories and poems. I
looked overatAugust, who stood by her desk with theJuly calendar pagein her hand. She wore her white dress with thelime green scarftied on her belt, just likeshe
was wearing thefirst day I showed up. Thescarf had no purpose hanging there other than adding atouch offlair. She hummed their song: Placea beehive onmy grave
and let the honey soak through. I was thinkingwhata good, fine mother she must’ve had.
‘Come on, Lily,’ shesaid.
‘We’ve gotallthesejars of honey to pastelabels on,and it’s justmeand you.’
Zachwas spending the day delivering honey to her selling placesall over town and picking up money fromthe previous month’s sales.
‘Honey money’ was what Zach called it. Even though the big honey flow was over, the bees were still out there sucking nectar, going about their business. (you
could not stop a bee fromworking if you tried.) Zach saidAugust’s honey brought fifty centsa pound. I figured she must be dripping in honeymoney. I didn’t see why
she wasn’t living in a hot pink mansion somewhere. Waiting on August to open a box containing the new shipment of Black Madonna labels, I studied a piece of
honeycomb. People don’t realize how smart bees are, even smarter than dolphins. Bees know enough geometry to make row after row of perfect hexagons, angles so
accurate you’d think they used rulers. They take plain flower juice and turn it into something everyone in the world loves to pour on biscuits. And I have personally
witnessed how it took a whole fifteen minutes for about fifty thousand bees to find those empty supers August had left out for them to clean up, passing along the
discovery in some kind ofadvanced bee language. But the main thing is they are hardworking to the point of killing themselves. Sometimes you want to say to them,
Relax, take some time off, you deserve it. As August reached down inside the box for the labels, I studied the return address:Holy Virgin Monastery Gift Shop, Post
Office Box 45, St. Paul, Minnesota. Next she pulled a fat envelope from her desk drawer and poured out dozens of a different, smaller label with printed letters:
BLACK MADONNA HONEY—Tiburon, South Carolina. I was supposed to swipe the backs of both labels with a wet sponge and hand them off to August to
position on the jars, but I paused a minute to take in the Black Madonna’s picture, which I’d studied so many times glued onto my mother’s little block of wood. I
admired the fancy gold scarf draped over her head, how it was decorated with red stars. Her eyes were mysterious and kind and her skin dark brown with a glow,
darker than toast and looking a little like it had been buttered. It always caused a tiny jump start inmy chest, me thinking that my ownmother had stared at this same
picture. I hated to imagine where I might have ended up if I hadn’t seen the Black Madonna’s picture that day in the Frogmore Stew General Store and Restaurant.
Probably sleeping on creek banksall over SouthCarolina. Drinking pond water with thecows. Peeing behind chinaberry bushesand wishing for thejoy oftoilet paper.
‘I hope you don’t takethis the wrongway,’
I said.
‘But I never thought ofthe VirginMary being colored tillI sawthis picture.’
‘Adark-faced Mary is notas unusualas you think,’ Augustsaid.
‘Thereare hundreds ofthemover in Europe, places like Franceand Spain. The one we put on our honey is old as the hills. She’s the Black Madonna ofBreznichar
inBohemia.’
‘Howdid you learn aboutallthat?’ Iasked. Sherested her handsand smiled, likethis had dredged up asweet, long-lostmemory.
‘I guess I would haveto say it started withmymother’s prayercards. She used to collect them, the way good Catholics did back then—you know, thosecards with
pictures ofsaints on them. She’d tradefor themlikelittle boys traded baseballcards.’
August let outa big laugh at that.
‘I bet she had a dozen Black Madonna cards. I used to love to play with her cards, especially the Black Madonnas. Then, when I went off to school, I read
everything Icould about them. That’s howI found outabout the Black Madonna ofBreznichar inBohemia.’
I tried to sayBreznichar, but it didn’tcome out right.
‘Well, Ican’tsay her name, but I love her picture.’
I swiped the back ofthelabeland watched August fix it on thejar, then fasten thesecand label beneath it,as ifshe’d donethis ten thousand times.
‘Whatelse do you love, Lily?’
No one had everasked methis before. What did I love? Right offthe bat I wanted to say I loved the picture ofmymother, howshe was leaning against thecar with
her hair looking just like mine, plus her glovesand her picture ofthe black Marywith the unpronounceable name, but I had to swallowthat back.
I said, ‘Well, I love Rosaleen,and I love writing storiesand poems—just give mesomething to writeand I willloveit.’
After that, I really had to think. I said, ‘This may besilly, butafter schoolI love Coca-Cola with salted peanuts poured in the bottle.And when I’mfinished with it, I
loveturning up the bottleto see whereitcamefrom.’
OnceI’d gotten a bottlefromMassachusetts, which I keptasatributeto howfar something can go in life.
‘And I love the color blue—the real bright blue like the hat May had on at the Daughters of Mary meeting. And since coming here, I’ve learned to love bees and
honey.’
I wanted to add, And you, I love you, but I felt too awkward.
‘Did you knowtherearethirty-two names for lovein one ofthe Eskimo languages?’ Augustsaid.
‘And we just have this one. We are so limited, you have to use the same word for loving Rosaleen as you do for loving a Coke with peanuts. Isn’t thata shame we
don’t have more ways to say it?’
I nodded, wonderingwhere was the limit of her knowing things. Probably one of those books she’d read after bedtime during the month ofAugust had been about
Eskimos.
‘I guess we’lljust haveto inventmore ways to say it,’ shesaid. Then shesmiled.
‘Do you knowI love peanuts inmyCoke, too? And blueis my favoritecolor?’
You know that saying, ‘Birds ofa feather flock together’? That’s how I felt. We were working on the jars oftupelo tree honey, which Zach and I had gathered out
there onClayton Forrest’s land, plusafewjars of purple honey fromthe hive wherethe bees had struck it rich on elderberries. It wasa nicecolorcoordination the way
the BohemianMadonna’s skinwas set off by the golds in the honey. Unfortunately, the purple honey didn’t do a wholelot for her.
‘Howcome you put the Black Madonna on your honey?’ Iasked. I’d been curiousabout this fromday one. Usually people got in arut putting honey bears on them.
August grewstill, holding ajar in her hand and looking into the distancelikeshe’d gonein search oftheanswerand that finding it had been the bonus ofthe day.
‘I wish you could’veseen the Daughters ofMary thefirst timethey laid eyes on this label.You knowwhy? Because when they looked at her, it occurred to themfor
thefirst timein their lives that what’s divinecan comein dark skin. You see,everybody needsa God who looks likethem, Lily.’
I only wished I’d been there when the Daughters of Mary had made this big discovery. I pictured them whooping it up in their glorious hats. Feathers flying.
Sometimes I would catch myself jiggling my foot till I thought it might fall off my leg bone—‘jimmy-leg,’ Rosaleen called it—and looking down now, I noticed it was
going at high speed. Usually it happened in the evenings when we did our prayers before Our Lady of Chains. Like my feet wanted to get up and march around the
roomin acongaline.
‘So howdid you get the black Mary statuein the parlor?’ Iasked.
‘Ican’t say, exactly. I only knowshecameinto thefamily at some point.You remember thestory about Obadiah taking the statue to the praise house, and howthe
slaves believed it was Mary who had come to be among them?’ I nodded. I remembered every detail. I’d seen it a hundred times inmymind since she’d first told it.
Obadiah down on his knees in the mud, bent over the washed-up statue. The statue standing proud in the praise house, Our Lady’s fist in the air and all the people
coming up oneatatimeto touch her heart, hoping to find alittlestrength to go on.
‘Well,’August said, going right onwith her pasting, ‘you know, she’s really just the figurehead offan old ship, but the people needed comfort and rescue, so when
they looked at it, they saw Mary, and so thespirit ofMary took it over. Really, her spirit iseverywhere, Lily, justeverywhere. Inside rocksand treesand even people,
butsometimes it will getconcentrated in certain placesand just beamoutat you in aspecialway.’
I had never thought of it like that, and it gave me a shocked feeling, like maybe I had no idea what kind ofworld I was actually living in, and maybe the teachers at
my school didn’t knoweither, the way they talked abouteverything being nothing butcarbon and oxygen and mineral, the dullest stuff you can imagine. I started thinking
about the world loaded with disguised Marys sitting around all over the place and hidden red hearts tucked about that people could rub and touch, onlywe didn’t recognizethem. Augustarranged thejars she’d labeled so far in acardboard box and set it on thefloor, then dragged outmorejars.
‘I’mjust trying to explain to youwhy the people took such care withOur Lady ofChains, passing her one generation to the next. The best we can figure, sometime
after the CivilWar shecameinto the possession ofmy grandmother’s people.
‘When I was younger than you, me and June and May—and April, too, because she was still alive then—all of us would visit our grandmother for the whole
summer. We’d sit on the rug in the parlor, and Big Mama—that’s what we called her—would tell us the story. Every time, when she finished, May would say, ‘Big
Mama, tell it again,’and offshe’d go, repeating the whole thing. I swear, if you listen to my chest with a stethoscope, what you’d hear is that story going on and on in
myBigMama’s voice.’
I was so caught up in what August was saying I had stopped wetting labels. I was wishing I had a story like that one to live inside me with so much loudness you
could pick it up on astethoscope,and not thestory I did haveaboutendingmymother’s lifeand sort ofendingmy own at thesametime.
‘You canwet thelabelsand listen,’ Augustsaid,and smiled.
‘So, after Big Mama died, Our Lady of Chains was passed to mymother. She stayed in Mother’s bedroom. My father hated her being in there. He wanted to get
rid ofthestatue, but Mother said, ‘Ifshe goes, I go.’
I think thestatue was thereasonMother be- camea Catholic, so shecould kneel down before herand not feel likeshe was doing anything peculiar. We would find
her in theretalking to Our Lady liketheyweretwo neighbors having sweet iced tea. Mother would tease Our Lady; she’d say, ‘You knowwhat?You should’ve had a
girlinstead.’
‘August set down thejar she was working on, and there wasa mix ofsorrowand amusementand longing across her face, and I thought, Sheis missing her mother. I
stopped wetting thelabels, not wanting to getahead of her. When she picked up thejaragain, I said, ‘Did you growup in this house?’
I wanted to knoweverything there wasabout her. Sheshook her head.
‘No, butmymother did. This is whereI spentmy summers,’ shesaid.
‘You see, the house belonged to my grandparents, and all this property around it. Big Mama kept bees, too, right out there in the same spot they’re in today.
Nobody around here had ever seen alady beekeeper till her. Sheliked to telleverybody that womenmadethe best beekeepers, ‘causethey haveaspecialability built
into themto lovecreatures thatsting.
‘Itcomes fromyears ofloving children and husbands,’ she’d say.’
August laughed,and so did I.
‘Was your BigMamathe one who taught you to keep bees?’
August took off her glassesand cleaned themon thescarfat her waist.
‘Shetaughtmelots moreabout bees than just howto keep them. She used to tellme onetall beetaleafteranother.’
I perked up.
‘Tellme one,’I said.August thumped her finger on her forehead likeshe was trying to tap one ofthemoffsome back shelfin her head. Then hereyes lit up, and she
said, ‘Well, onetime BigMamatold meshe went out to the hives onChristmas Eveand heard the bees singing the words ofthe Christmas story right out ofthe gospel
ofLuke.’
Auguststarted to sing then in a humming sort ofway, ’
‘Mary brought forth her firstborn child and wrapped himin swaddling clothesand laid himin the manger.’
‘I giggled.
‘Do you think that really happened?’
‘Well, yesand no,’ shesaid.
‘Somethings happen in aliteralway, Lily. And then other things, likethis one, happen in a not literalway, but they still happen. Do you knowwhat I mean?’
I didn’t haveaclue.
‘Not really,’ I said.
‘What I mean is that the bees weren’t really singing the words fromLuke, but still, if you have the right kind ofears, you can listen to a hive and hear the Christmas
story somewhere inside yourself. You can hear silent things on the other side ofthe everydayworld that nobody else can. BigMama had those kind ofears. Now, my
mother, she didn’t really havethat gift. I think itskipped a generation.’
I was itching to knowmoreabout her mother.
‘I bet your mother kept bees, too,’ I said. Sheseemed amused at that.
‘Goodness no, she wasn’t interested at all. She left here as soon as she could and went to live with a cousin up in Richmond. Got a job in a hotel laundry. You
remember the first day you got here, I told you I grew up in Richmond? Well, that’s where my father was from. He was the first colored dentist in Richmond. He met
mymother when she went to see himwith atoothache.’
I sat therea minuteand thoughtabout the odd ways oflife. Ifit wasn’t foratoothache,August wouldn’t be here. Or May or June, or Black Madonna Honey, and I
wouldn’t besitting heretalking to her.
‘I loved Richmond, butmy heart wasalways right here,’ shesaid.
‘Growing up, I couldn’t wait to get here and spend the summers, and when BigMama died, she leftall this property to me, June, and May. I’ve been here keeping
bees nearly eighteen years now. Sunlight gleamed against the honey-house window, flickering now and then with a shifting cloud. We sat in the yellowish quiet for a
while and worked without talking. I was afraid I’d tire her out with allmy questions. Finally I couldn’t hold myself back. I said, ‘So what did you do inVirginia before
you came here?’
She gave me a teasing look that seemed to say, My goodness, you sure do wanna know a lot ofthings, but then she dived right in, her hands not slowing down one
bit pasting labels.
‘I studied at a Negro teachers’college in Maryland. June did, too, but it was hard to get a job, since there weren’t that many places for Negroes to teach. I ended
up working nine yearsasa housekeeper. Eventually I gotajob teaching history. It lasted six years, tillwe moved down here.’
‘WhataboutJune?’
Shelaughed.
‘June—youwouldn’tcatch her keeping housefor white people. She went to work atacolored funeral home, dressing the bodiesand doing their hair.’
Thatseemed likethe perfect job for her. It would beeasy for her to getalongwith dead people.
‘May said Junealmost gotmarried onetime.’
‘That’s right. About ten yearsago.’
‘I was wondering—‘ I stopped, looking fora way to ask her.
‘Youwere wondering ifthere waseveratime when Ialmost gotmarried.’
‘Yeah,’ I said.
‘I guess I was.’
‘I decided against marrying altogether. There were enough restrictions inmy life without someone expectingme to wait on himhand and foot. Not that I’magainst
marrying, Lily. I’mjustagainst howit’s set up.’
I was thinking, Well, it’s not just marriage that’s set up like that. What about me waiting on T. Ray hand and foot, and we were just father and daughter? Pour me
some moretea, Lily. Polishmy shoes, Lily. Go get thetruck keys, Lily. I sincerely hoped she didn’tmean this sort ofthingwent on in a marriage.
‘Weren’t you ever in love?’
Iasked.
‘Being in loveand gettingmarried, now, that’s two different things. I was in love once, ofcourseI was. Nobody should go through life without falling in love.’
‘But you didn’t love himenough to marry him?’
Shesmiled atme.
‘I loved himenough,’ shesaid.
‘I just loved my freedommore.’ We glued labels tillwe ran out of jars. Then, for the heck of it, I moistened the back of one more and pressed it onto my T-shirt, in the gully betweenmy breasts.
August looked at theclock,announcingwe’d doneso good with our time we had a whole hour left beforelunch.
‘Come on,’ shesaid.
‘Let’s do bee patrol.’
Though I’d done bee patrol with Zach, I hadn’t been back to the hives withAugust since that first time. I pulled on long cotton pants that used to be June’s and
August’s whiteshirt, which needed thesleeves rolled up about ten turns. Then I placed thejungle helmet onmy head, letting the veilfall down over my face. We walked
to the woods besidethe pink house with her stories still pulled softaround our shoulders. Icould feelthemtouchingmein places, likean actualshawl.
‘Thereis onething I don’t get,’ I said.
‘What’s that?’
‘Howcomeif your favoritecolor is blue, you painted your houseso pink?’
Shelaughed.
‘That was May’s doing. She was withme the day I went to the paint store to pick out the color. I had a nice tan color inmind, but May latched on to this sample
called Caribbean Pink. Shesaid it made her feel like dancing a Spanish flamenco. I thought, ‘Well, this is thetackiestcolor I’ve ever seen, and we’ll have halfthe town
talking about us, but ifitcan lift May’s heart likethat, I guess she ought to liveinsideit.’
’
‘Allthis timeI just figured you liked pink,’ I said. Shelaughed again.
‘You know, somethings don’t matter that much, Lily. Likethecolor ofa house. Howbig is that in the overallscheme oflife? But lifting a person’s heart—now, that
matters. The whole problemwith peopleis—’
‘They don’t knowwhatmattersand what doesn’t,’ I said, filling in her sentenceand feeling proud ofmyselffor doing so.
‘I was gonnasay, The problemis they knowwhat matters, but they don’tchooseit.You knowhowhard that is, Lily? I love May, but it was stillso hard to choose
Caribbean Pink. The hardest thing on earth ischoosingwhatmatters.’
I couldn’t locate a stray bee anywhere. The hives looked like an abandoned neighborhood, the air groggy with heat. You got the impression the bees were inside
having a big siesta. Maybeallthatexcessive work had finally caught up with them.
‘Wherearethey?’I said.August placed her finger to her lips, signalingmeto be quiet. Shelifted off her helmetand laid theside of her faceflatagainst thetop ofthe
hive box.
‘Comelisten,’ she whispered. I removed my hat, tucking it under my arm,and placed my face next to hers so that we were practically noseto nose.
‘You hear that?’ shesaid. Asound rushed up. Aperfect hum, high-pitched and swollen, likesomeone had put theteakettle on and it had cometo a boil.
‘They’recooling the hives down,’ shesaid,and her breath broke over my face with thesmell ofspearmint.
‘That’s thesound of one hundred thousand bee wings fanning theair.’
Sheclosed hereyesand soaked it in the way you imagine peopleatafancy orchestraconcert drinking up highbrowmusic. I hopeit’s not too backward to say that I
felt like I had never heard anything onmy hi-fi back home that came out that good. You would have to hear it yourself to believe the perfect pitch, the harmony parts,
howthe volumerolled up and down. We had ourears pressed to a giantmusic box. Then the wholeside ofmy facestarted to vibrateas ifthe music had rushed into my
pores. Icould see August’s skin pulsating thetiniest bit. Whenwestood back up, my cheek prickled and itched.
‘Youwerelistening to beeair-conditioning,’ Augustsaid.
‘Most people don’t haveany ideaaboutallthecomplicated life going on insidea hive. Bees haveasecret life we don’t knowanything about.’
I loved theidea of bees having asecret life, just likethe oneI was living.
‘What other secrets havethey got?’ I wanted to know.
‘Well, for instance,every bee has its roleto play.’
She went through the wholething. The nest builders werethe group that drewthecomb. I told her the way they created hexagons, theymust bethe ones who could
do math in their heads, and shesmiled and said, yes, nest builders had true math aptitude. Field bees werethe ones with good navigation skillsand tireless hearts, going
out to gather nectarand pollen. There wasa group called mortician bees whose pitiful job it was to rakethe dead bees out ofthe hiveand keep everything on theclean
side. Nurse bees, August said, had a gift for nurturing, and they fed all the baby bees. They were probably the self-sacrificing group, like the women at church socials
who said, ‘No, you takethechicken breast. I’mjust fine with the neck and gizzard, really.’
The onlymales werethe drones who sataround waiting to mate with the queen.
‘And ofcourse,’ Augustsaid, ‘there’s the queen and herattendants.’
‘She hasattendants?’
‘Oh, yes, like ladies-in-waiting. They feed her, bathe her, keep her warmor cool—whatever’s needed. You can see themalways circled around her, fussing over
her. I’veeven seen themcaress her.’
August returned her helmet to her head.
‘I guess I’d wantcomfort, too, ifI did nothing but lay eggsall day long, week in and week out.’
‘That’sallshe does—lay eggs?’ I wasn’tsure what Iexpected, it wasn’t likeshe woreacrown and sat on athrone giving out royal orders.
‘Egg laying is the main thing, Lily. She’s the mother ofevery bee in the hive, and they all depend on her to keep it going. I don’t care what their job is—they know
the queen is their mother. She’s the mother ofthousands.’
The mother ofthousands. Bees poured out, rushing up all ofasudden in spirals ofchaosand noise, thatcaused meto jump.
‘Don’tmovean inch,’ said August.
‘Remember what I told you. Don’t bescared.’
Abeeflewstraightatmy forehead,collided with the net,and bumped againstmy skin.
‘She’s giving you alittle warning,’ Augustsaid.
‘When they bump your forehead, they’resaying, I’ve gotmy eye on you, so you becareful. Send themloveand everythingwill befine.’
I love you, I love you, I said inmy head. I LOVEY. I tried to mean it.August pulled out the brood frames notevenwearing her gloves. Whileshe worked, the bees
spun around us, gathering strength till they made soft wind on our faces. It reminded me of the way the bees had flown out ofmy bedroomwalls, stranding me at the
center ofa bee whirlwind. I watched the different shadows on the ground. Thefunnel of bees. Me, stillasafence post.August bent over the hive, inspecting theframes,
looking for wax buildup on thecomb, the halfmoon shape of her helmet bouncing along. The bees began to light onmy shoulders the ways birds sit on telephone wires.
They satalongmy arms, speckled the bee veilso Icould scarcely see through it. I love you. I love you. They covered my body, filled the cuffs ofmy pants. My breath
came faster, and something coiled around my chest and squeezed tighter and tighter, untilsuddenly, like somebody had snapped off the panic switch, I felt myself go
limp. Mymind became unnaturally calm, as if part ofme had lifted right up out ofmy body and was sitting on a tree limb watching the spectacle froma safe distance.
The other part ofme danced with the bees. I wasn’t moving a lick, but inmymind I was spinning through the air with them. I had joined the bee conga line. I sort of
forgot where I was. With my eyes closed, I slowly raised my arms, weaving themthrough the bees, until finally I stood with themstretched out frommy sides in a
dreamy place I’d never been before. My neck rolled back and mymouth opened. I was floating somewhere, somewhere that didn’t rub too close against life. Like I’d
chewed the bark froma toothache tree and it had made me dizzy. Lost in the bees, I felt dropped into a field ofenchanted clover that made me immune to everything,
as ifAugust has doused me with the bee smoker and quieted me down to the point I could do nothing but raise my arms and sway back and forth. Then, without
warning, all the immunity wore off, and I felt the hollow, spooned-out space between my naveland breastbone begin to ache. The motherless place. I could see my
mother in the closet, the stuck window, the suitcase on the floor. I heard the shouting, then the explosion. I almost doubled over. I lowered my arms, but I didn’t open
my eyes. How could I live the whole rest ofmy life knowing these things? What could I ever do that would be good enough to make themgo away? How come we
couldn’t go back and fix the bad things we did? Later my mind would remember the plagues God had been fond ofsending early in his career, the ones designed to
make the pharaoh change his mind and let Moses take the people out of Egypt. Let my people go, Moses said. I’d seen the plague of locusts at the movies, the sky
filled with hordes ofinsects looking like kamikaze planes. Back inmy roomon the peach farm, when the bees had firstcome outat night, I had imagined theyweresent
as a special plague for T. Ray. God saying, Let my daughter go, and maybe that’s exactlywhat they’d been, a plague that released me. But here, now, surrounded by
stinging bees on allsidesand the motherless place throbbing away, I knew that these bees were nota plague atall. It felt like the queen’sattendants were out here in a
frenzy oflove,caressingmein athousand places. Look who’s here, it’s Lily. Sheis so weary and lost. Come on, beesisters. I was thestamen in the middle ofatwirling
flower. Thecenter ofalltheircomforting.
‘Lily…Lily.’
My namecameacross the blue distances.
‘Lily!’ I opened my eyes. August stared through her spectacles. The bees had shaken the pollen dust off their feet and were starting to settle back into the hive. I
could seetiny grains ofit drifting in theair.
‘Are you okay?’ Augustsaid. I nodded. Was I?I had no idea.
‘You know, don’t you, that thetwo of us need to havea good talk. And this time notaboutme. About you.’
I wished Icould do likethe bees, just bump her forehead with a warning, tap it withmy finger. I gotmy eye on you. Becareful. Don’t go any further.
‘I suppose,’ Ianswered.
‘Whatabout right now?’
‘Not right now.’
‘But, Lily—’
‘I’mstarved,’ I said.
‘I think I’ll go on back to the houseand seeiflunch is ready.’
I didn’t wait for her to speak. Walking to the pink house, Icould almost seetheend oftheline. I touched the place onmy shirt whereI’d stuck the black Mary. She
was starting to come unglued. The whole house smelled like fried okra. Rosaleenwas setting the table in the kitchenwhile May dipped down in the grease and brought
up the golden brown kernels. I didn’t know what had brought on the okra, since it was usually bologna sandwichesand more bologna sandwiches. May had not had a
crying jag since lune performed her tomato-throwing fit, and we were all holding our breath. After going this long, I worried that even something as simple as burned
okra might send her over the edge. I said I was hungry, and Rosaleen said to hold my wild horses. Her lower lip was plumped out with Red Rose snuff. The smell
followed her around the kitchen like it was on a leash, a combination ofallspice, fresh earth and rotten leaves. Between the okra and the snuff I could not get a decent
breath. Rosaleen walked across the back porch, leaned out the door, and spit a tiny jet stream across the hydrangeas. Nobody could spit like Rosaleen. I’d had
fantasies of her winning a hundred dollars in a spitting contest and the two of us ing to a nice motel inAtlanta and ordering roomservice with the prize money. It had
always beenmy fond wish to stay in a motel, butat that moment if you had told meIcould’ve had my choice ofluxurymotels with heated poolsand television sets right
in the room, I would’ve turned it down flat for the pink house. There had been a few times, though, just after I woke up, when I thought about my old house, and I
would miss it for a second or two before I remembered kneeling on the kitchen floor with grits digging into my kneecaps or trying to step around a great big pile of T.
Ray’s nastymood but usually landing right in it. I would remember himtearing into me, shouting Jesus H. Christ, Jesus H. Christ! The worst slap across the face Iever
got was when I interrupted himto ask just what did the H. stand for anyway? One quick walk down memory lane and the old home feeling would blow right over. I
would takethe pink houseany day. Zach shuffled into the kitchen behind August.
‘My, my. Okra and pork chops for lunch. What’s this about?’Augustasked May. May sidled over to her and said in a low voice, ‘It has been five days since I’ve
been to the wall,’and I could see how proud ofthis fact she was, how she wanted to believe her days of hystericalcryingwere behind her, how this okra lunchwas a
celebration. Augustsmiled at her.
‘Five days, really? Well, that deservesafeast,’ shesaid. And May, she beamed. Zach plopped down in achair.
‘Did you finish delivering the honey?’ Augustasked him.
‘Everywhere but Mr. Clayton’s law office,’ he said. He was fidgeting with everything in sight. First the place mat, then a loose thread on his shirt. Like he was
bursting to say something. August looked himover.
‘You gotsomething on your mind?’
‘Youwon’t believe what people downtown aresaying,’ hesaid.
‘They’resaying Jack Palanceiscoming to Tiburon this weekend and bringing acolored womanwith him.’ Weallstopped what we were doing and looked ateach other.
‘Who’s Jack Palance?’ Rosaleen said. Even though we hadn’t started lunch yet, she had bitten into a piece of pork chop and was chewing and talking with her
mouth open. I tried to catch hereye, pointing to my closed mouth, hoping she’d get the message.
‘He’sa moviestar,’ said Zach. Junesnorted.
‘Well, howdumb is that? What would a moviestar be doing inTiburon?’
Zach shrugged.
‘They say his sister lives here, and he’scoming to visitand intends to takethiscolored woman to the movietheater this Friday. Not to the balcony, but downstairs in
the whitesection.’
August turned to May.
‘Why don’t you go out to the garden and pick somefresh tomatoes to go with our lunch?’shesaid, thenwaited tillMaywas out the door. Icould tellshe wasafraid
Jack Palancetrying to integratethe movietheater might ruinMay’s okrafeast.
‘Are peoplestirred up about this?’ sheasked Zach. Hereyes looked serious.
‘Yes, ma’am,’ hesaid.
‘InGarret’s Hardwarethere were white men talking aboutstanding guard outsidethetheater.’
‘Lord, here we go,’said Rosaleen. June made a pffffsound with her lips while August shook her head, and it washed over me for the first time inmy life just how
much importancethe world had ascribed to skin pigment, howlately it seemed that skin pigment was thesun and everything elsein the universe was the orbiting planets.
Ever since school let out this summer, it had been nothing but skin pigment every livelong day. I was sick of it. In Sylvan we’d had a rumor at the first of the summer
about a busload of people fromNewYork City showing up to integrate the city pool. Talk about a panic. We had a citywide emergency on our hands, as there is no
greater affliction for the southern mind than people up north coming down to fix our way of life. After that was the whole mess with the men at the Esso station. It
seemed to me it would have been better if God had deleted skin pigment altogether. As May came back into the kitchen, August said, ‘Let’s enjoy our meal,’ which
meant Jack Palance was notalunch topic. May plopped down three big tomatoes, and whilesheand Ro- saleen sliced themup,August went to the den and puta Nat
KingColerecord on the player—a machineso old therecords would noteven drop automaticfashion. She wascrazy about Nat KingCole, and shereturned, with the
volume up, frowning in that way people do when they bite into something and it tastes so delicious they appear to be in pain over it. June turned up her nose. She only
cared for Beethoven and that whole group. She wentand turned thesound down.
‘Ican’t think,’shesaid.August said, ‘You knowwhat?You think too much. It would do you a world of good to stop thinking and just go with your feelings oncein
a blue moon.’
June said she would take her lunch in her room, thank you. I guess that was justas well, because I was looking at the tomatoes May and Rosaleenwere slicing and
rehearsing in my head how I would say, So will you have some tomatoes, June? Don’t you love tomatoes? Now at least I would be saved fromthat. We ate till we
were tired out from eating, which is the way people in South Carolina eat at family reunions. Zach pushed back from the table, saying he was heading to Clayton
Forrest’s officeto leavea dozen jars of honey.
‘Can I go?’Iasked.August knocked over her sweet tea,athing so unlike her.You did notassociatespills withAugust. WithMay, for sure, but notAugust. Tearan
across the table and onto the floor. I thought this might set May off, the tragedy ofa spilled drink. But she only got up, humming ‘Oh! Susanna’ without real urgency,
and grabbed atowel.
‘I don’t know, Lily,’ Augustsaid.
‘Please.’
AllI reallywanted was sometime withZach and to expand myworld by visiting the office ofareal-lifelawyer.
‘Well, allright,’she said. The office was situated one block offMain Street, where Rosa- leen and I had paraded into town that Sundaymore than thre weeksago.
It didn’t look like my idea ofa law office. The whole operation was really a large house, white with black shutters and a wraparound porch with big rocking chairs,
which must been for people to collapse into with reliefafter they’d won their cases. Asign on the lawn said CLAYTON FORREST, AT LAW. His secretary was a
white ladywho looked abouteighty years old. She satata desk in the reception area, putting on fire-red lip- stick. Her hair was permed into tightcurls that had a faint
bluecast.
‘Hi, Miss Lacy,’ Zach said.
‘I broughtmore honey.’
She worked thelipstick back into thetube, lookingmildly an- noyed.
‘More honey,’ shesaid, shaking her head. Shelet outan overdonesigh and reached into a drawer.
‘The money for thelast batch is in here.’
She dropped an envelope onto the desk. Shelooked me over.
‘You’re new.’
‘I’mLily,’ I said.
‘She’s stayingwithAugust,’ Zach explained.
‘You’restaying in her house?’ shesaid. I wanted to tell her that her lipstick was bleeding into the wrinklesaround her lips.
‘Yes, ma’am, I’mstaying there.’
‘Well, I’ll be,’ shesaid. She gathered her pocketbook and stood up.
‘I’ve gotan appointmentat the dentist. Put thejars over there on thetable.’
I pictured her whispering the news to all the people in the waiting roomwho were about to get their cavities drilled. This white girl, Lily, is staying with the colored
Boatwright sisters. Now, doesn’t that seemstrange to you? As she left, Mr. Forrest came out of his office. The first thing I noticed was his red suspenders. I’d never
seen a thin person wear suspenders, and it was a nice look, the way it matched his red bow tie. He had sandy hair, and bushy eyebrows that curled toward his blue
eyes,and smilecrinkles in his facethatsignaled a good person. So good thatapparently hecouldn’t bring himselfto get rid ofMiss Lacy. Helooked atme.
‘And who would this pretty young lady be?’
‘Lily uh—‘ Icould not remember what last nameI wascurrently using. I think it was because he’d referred to meas pretty, which had been ashock to my system.
‘Just Lily.’
I stood therelooking gawky, with onefoot tucked behind the other.
‘I’mstayingwithAugust tillI go live withmy aunt inVirginia.’
Himbeing alawyer, I worried he mightask meto takealie-detector test.
‘Hownice. August isa good friend ofmine,’ hesaid.
‘I hope you’reenjoying your stay?’
‘Yes, sir. Verymuch.’
‘What case are you working on?’asked Zach, stuffing the envelope of honeymoney into his pocket and setting the box of jars on the side table by the window. It
had aframed [-] sign on it.
‘Run-of-the-millstuff. Deeds, wills. I gotsomething for you, though. Come on back to the officeand I’llshowyou.’
‘I’lljust wait out hereand arrangethe honey,’ I said, hating to intrude butmostly feeling uncommonly awkward around him.
‘You sure? You’re welcometo come, too.’
‘I’msure. I likeit out here.’
They disappeared down a hallway. I heard a doorclose.Acar horn on thestreet. The blast ofthe windowairconditioner that dripped water into a dog bowl on the
floor. I stacked thejars in a pyramid. Seven on bottom, four in the middle, and one on top, but it looked misshapen, so I took itapartand settled for plain rows. I went
over and inspected the pictures that covered one whole wall. First was a diploma fromthe University of South Carolina and then another one fromDuke University.
Next was a picture of Mr. Forrest on a boat, wearing sunglasses and holding a fish about my size. After that, Mr. Forrest shaking hands with Bobby Kennedy. Last,
Mr. Forrestand asmall blond-headed girl, standing in the ocean. She was jumping overa wave. Thespraymadea bluefan behind her, a peacock tail ofwater, and he
was helping her, lifting her up and over it with his hand, smiling down on her. I bet he knewher favorit, color, what sheateforafternoon snacks, everything sheloved. I
wentand sat on one ofthetwo red sofas in theroom. Williams. My made-up last name finally came to me. I counted the plants in the room. Four. The floorboards fromthe desk to the front door. Fifteen. Closing my
eyes, I pictured the ocean stretched out thecolor offresh-polished silver, the whitefroth on it, light scattering everywhere. I sawmyselfjumping a wave. T. Ray held my
hand, pullingme up and over. I had to concentrateso hard to makethis happen. Thirty-two names for love. Was it unthinkable hecould speak one ofthemto me, even
the one reserved for lesser things like peanuts in your Coke? Was it so out of the question that T. Ray knew I loved the color blue? What if he was home missingme,
saying, Why ohwhy didn’t I love her better? Miss Lacy’s telephonesat right there on her desk. I picked up thereceiverand dialed 0 for operator.
‘I ammaking a collect call,’ I told her, and gave her the number. Almost faster than I would’ve believed, I heard the phone inmy house ringing. I stared down the
hallway at theclosed doorand counted therings. Three, four, five, six.
‘Hello.’
His voicecaused my stomach to pitch into my throat. I was unprepared for the way it buckled my knees. I had to sit down inMiss Lacy’schair spraddle-legged.
‘I haveacollectcallfromLilyOwens,’ the operator said.
‘Will you accept thecharge?’
‘You’re goddamn right I’llaccept it,’ hesaid. Then, without waiting for meto say P-turkey, helaunched right in.
‘Lily, wherethe hellare you?’
I had to hold the phonefrommy eardrumfor fear of himrupturing it.
‘T. Ray, I’msorry I had to leave, but—’
‘You tellme where you areright now, do you hear me? Do you haveany ideathetrouble you’rein? BustingRosaleen out ofthe hospital—holy shit, what were you
thinking?’
‘I was only—’
‘I’ll tell you what you were. You were a goddamn fool who went looking for trouble and found it. Because of you I can’t walk down the street in Sylvan without
peoplestaring atme. I’ve had to stop everything and search for you all overcreation,and meanwhilethe peaches have goneto hell.’
‘Well, quit yelling,allright?I said I was sorry.’
‘Your sorry ain’t worth ashitload of peaches, Lily. I swear to God—’
‘Icalled becauseI was just wondering something.’
‘Whereare you? Answer me.’
I squeezed thearmofthechair tillmy knuckles hurt.
‘I was wondering, do you knowwhatmy favoritecolor is?’
‘Jesus Christ. Whatare you talking about? You tellme where you are.’
‘I said, do you knowwhatmy favoritecolor is?’
‘I knowonething, and that’s I’mgonnafind you, Lily, and when I do, I’mgonnatear your behind to pieces—‘ I lowered thereceiver back to thecradleand sat on
thesofaagain. I sat in the brightness oftheafternoon and watched the hemoflight under the venetian blinds. I told myself, Don’t you cry. Don’t you darecry. So what
if he doesn’t knowthecolor you love best? So what? Zach returned holding a big brown book that looked halfmoldywith age.
‘Look what Mr. Clayton gave me,’ hesaid,and honestly, youwould havethought it wasasix-pound baby he’d birthed by the proud look of him.
Heturned it over so Icould read the binding. SouthCarolina LegalReports 1889. Zach rubbed his hand across thefront,and littleflecks ofit fell off onto thefloor.
‘I’mstartingmy lawlibrary.’
‘That’s nice,’ I said. Mr. Forreststepped closer, staring atme with such intensity I thought I must need to wipe my nose.
‘Zach says you’refromSpartanburgCounty, that your parents both died?’
‘Yes, sir.’
One thing I didn’t want was to get on the witness stand right here in his office and have himfire lawyer questionsat me. An hour fromnow Rosaleen and Icould be
packing for prison.
‘What brings you—’
‘I really do need to get back.’
I putmy hand lowonmy stomach.
‘I’mhaving alittlefemaletrouble.’
I tried to look very femaleand mysterious, slightly troubled by internal things they could not imagineand did not want to. It had beenmy experiencefor nearly a year
that uttering the words ‘femaletrouble’could getmeinto places I wanted to go and out of places I didn’t.
‘Oh,’ said Zach.
‘Well, let’s go.’
‘Niceto meet you, Mr. Forrest,’ I said. Clutchingmy abdomen. Asmallwince. Walking slowly to the door.
‘Believe me, Lily,’ hesaid,calling after me, ‘the pleasure wasallmine.’
Have you ever written a letter you knew you could never mail but you needed to write it anyway? Back inmy roomat the honey house, I wrote a letter to T. Ray,
duringwhich I brokethe points offthree pencils,and the words…well, they looked likethey’d been laid on the paper with branding irons.
Dear T. Ray,
Iamsick to death of you yelling at me. Iamnot deafIamonly stupid forcalling you up. If youwere being tortured byMartiansand the only thing thatcould save
youwas telling themmy favoritecolor, youwould die on thespot. What was I thinking? AllI had to do was remember the Father’s Day card I madefor youwhen
I was nineand still hoping for love. Do you remember it, well ofcourse you don’t. I do, becauseI nearly killed myselfworking on it. I never told you I was up half
the night with a dictionary looking up words to go with the letters in Daddy. I got the idea, not that you are interested, fromMrs. Poole who had us do this in
Sunday school with the word Joy. J—Jesus; O—Others; y—Yourself This is the correct order for life, she said, and if you follow it, you will have JOY, JOY,
JOY. Well, I tried that, puttingmyself last left and right, and I amstillwaiting for Joy to show up. So the exercise was good for nothing except for givingme the
ideafor yourcard. I thought ifI spelled out the meaning ofDaddy to you, it would help you along. I was trying to say, here, try thesethings, I willso appreciateit.
I used words like DELIGHTFUL, DETERMINED TO BEKIND. Iexpected it to get propped on your dresser, and the next day I find it on the telephone table
where you have peeled a peach on top of it, and the skin and pit are stuck to the paper. I have always wanted to say to you that was DESPICABLE. D—
DESPICABLE A—ANGRY D—DUD OF A FATHER D—DISAPPPOINTMENT—YOKE AROUND MY NECK Writing this is not the Jesus-OthersYourself philosophy oflife, but it brings meJ-O-ally to finally say thesethings to your face.
Love, Lily
P. S. I do not for one halfsecond believe mymother leftme.
I read theletter back, then toreit into tiny pieces. I felt reliefto getall that out ofmy system, but I had lied about it bringingmejoy. Ialmost wanted to writeanother
letter that I would not send and say I’msorry. That night, when the pink house was sound asleep, I came creeping in, needing the bathroom. I never worried about
findingmyway through the house, asAugust leftatrail of night-lights on fromthe kitchen to the bathroom. I had come barefoot, collecting dewon thesoles ofmy feet.
Sitting on thetoilet, trying to pee very quietly, Icould seecrepe myrtle petals stuck to nay toes. Over my head, Rosaleen’s snores sifted through theceiling. It isalways
areliefto empty your bladder. Better than sex, that’s what Rosaleen said.As good as it felt, though, I sincerely hoped she was wrong. I headed toward the kitchen, but
then something made me turn around; your guess is as good as mine. I walked in the opposite direction to the parlor. Stepping inside, I heard a sigh so deep and
satisfying that fora moment I didn’t realizeit had comefrommy own lungs. Thecandlein thered glass besidethe Mary statuestill burned, looking likeatiny red heart in
acave of darkness, pulsing out light to the world.August kept it going nightand day. It reminded me oftheeternalflamethey’d put on John F Kennedy’s gravethat will
never go out no matter what. Our Lady of Chains looked so different late at night, her face older and darker, her fist bigger than I remembered. I wondered about all
the places she’d traveled out there on the waters ofthe world, all the sad things that had beenwhispered to her, the things she’d endured. Sometimes, after we’d done
our prayers with the beads, I could not remember how to cross myselfright, getting it mixed up like youwould expectany Baptist-raised person to do. Whenever that
happened, I just put my hand over my heart like we did in schoolfor the Pledge ofAllegiance. I felt one was as good as another, and that’s what happened now—my
hand just went automatically to my heart and stayed there. I told her, Fixme, please—fixme. Help me know what to do. Forgive me. Is mymother all right up there
withGod? Don’t let themfind us. If they find us, don’t let themtake me back. If they find us, keep Rosaleen frombeing killed. Let June love me. Let T. Ray love me.
Help me stop lying. Make the world better. Take the meanness out of people’s hearts. I moved closer, so now I could see the heart on her chest. Inmymind I heard
the bees fanning their wings down in the dark music box. I sawAugustand me with ourearsagainst the hive. I remembered her voicethefirst timeshetold thestory of
Our Lady ofChains. Send themrescue, send themconsolation, send themfreedom. I reached outand traced black Mary’s heart withmy finger. I stood with the petals
onmy toesand pressed my palmflatand hard against her heart. I livein a hive of darkness,and you are mymother, I told her. You arethe mother ofthousands.
Chapter Nine
The wholefabric of honey beesociety depends on communication—on an innateability to send and receive messages, to encodeand decodeinformation. —The HoneyBee
[-] was a day I look back on it and the record books. What comes to me are people going over Niagara Falls in barrels. Ever since I’d heard about that, I’d tried to
imagine peoplecrouched inside, bobbing along peacefully likearubber duck in achild’s bathtub, and suddenly the water turning choppy and the barrelstarting to thrash
around while a roar grows in the dis- tance. I knew they were in there saying, Shitbucket, what was I thinking? At eight o’clock in the morning it hit 94, with the
ambitious plan of reaching 103 before noon. I woke up with August shaking my shoulder, saying it was gonna be a scorcher, get up, we had to water the bees. I
climbed into the honeywagonwithmy hair uncombed, withMay handingme buttered toastand orangejuicethrough the windowand Rosaleen sticking in thermoses of
water, both of them practically running alongside the truck while August rolled out of the driveway. I felt like the Red Cross springing to action to save the bee
queendom. In the back ofthetruck August had gallons ofsugar wateralreadymade up.
‘When it gets overa hundred,’ shesaid, ‘theflowers dry up and there’s no food for the bees. They stay in the hives fanning themselves. Sometimes they just roast.’
I felt like we might roast alive ourselves. You could not touch the door handle for fear of a third-degree burn. Sweat ran between my breasts and sopped my
underwear band. August turned on the radio for the weather, but what we heard was how Ranger 7 had finally landed on the surface of the moon in a place called the
Sea ofClouds, howpolice were looking for the bodies ofthose three civilrights workers inMississippi, and the terrible things that had happened in the Gulf of Tonkin.
It ended with a story about what was happening ‘closer to home,’ how black people fromTiburon, Florence, and Orangeburg were marching today all the way to
Columbiaasking the governor to enforcethe CivilRights Act. August turned it off. Enoughwasenough. You cannot fix the whole world.
‘I’vealreadywatered the hivesaround the house,’ shesaid.
‘Zach is taking care ofthe hives on theeastside ofthecounty. So you and I’ve got the westside.’
Rescuing bees took us theentire morning. Driving back into remotecorners ofthe woods wherethere were barely roads, we would come upon twenty-five beehives
up on slats like a little lostcity tucked back in there. We lifted the covers and filled the feeders with sugar water. Earlier we’d spooned dry sugar into our pockets, and
now, justasa bonus, wesprinkled it on thefeeding rims. I managed to getstung onmywrist whilereplacing alid onto a hive box. Augustscraped out thestinger.
‘I was sending themlove,’ I said, feeling betrayed. Augustsaid, ‘Hot weather makes the bees out ofsorts, I don’tcare howmuch love you send them.’
She pulled asmall bottle of olive oiland bee pollen fromher free pocketand rubbed my skin—her patented remedy. It was something I’d hoped never to test out.
‘Count yourselfinitiated,’ shesaid.
‘You can’t beatrue beekeeper without getting stung.’
Atrue beekeeper. The words caused a fullness in me, and right at that moment an explosion of blackbirds lifted off the ground in a clearing a short distance away
and filled up the wholesky. I said to myself, Willwonders nevercease?I would add that to my list ofcareers. Awriter,anEnglish teacher,and a beekeeper.
‘Do you think Icould keep bees one day?’Iasked.August said, ‘Didn’t you tellmethis past week one ofthethings you loved was beesand honey? Now, ifthat’s
so, you’ll beafine beekeeper. Actually, you can be bad atsomething, Lily, but if you love doing it, that will beenough.’
The sting shot pain all the way to my elbow, causing me to marvel at how much punishment a minuscule creature can inflict. I’m prideful enough to say I didn’t
complain.After you get stung, you can’t get unstung no matter howmuch youwhineabout it. I just dived back into theriptide ofsaving bees. Whenwe had watered all
the hives ofTiburon and sprinkled enough sugar to causea human being to gain fifty pounds, we drove home hot, hungry, and nearly drowned in our own sweat. Pulling
into the driveway, we found Rosaleen and May sipping sweet tea on the back porch. May said she’d left our lunches in the refrigerator, cold pork-chop sandwiches
and slaw. While weate, we heard June upstairs in her roomplaying thecello likesomething had died. Wescarfed down everymorselwithout talking, then pushed back
fromthe table. We were wondering how to get our tired selves to a standing position when we heard squealing and laughing, the kind you’re apt to hear at a school
recess. August and I dragged ourselves to the porch to see. And there were May and Rosaleen running through the water sprinkler, barefoot and fully clothed. They
had gone berserk. Rosaleen’s muumuuwas sopped and plastered to her body, and Maywas catchingwater in the bowl of her dress skirt and tossing it up across her
face. Sunlight hit the hair sheen on her braidsand lit themup.
‘Well, isn’t this theliving end?’ Augustsaid. Whenwe got out there, Rosaleen picked up thesprinklerand aimed itat us.
‘You come over here and you gonna get wet,’she said, and splat] we were hit full in the chest with ice-cold water. Rosaleen turned the sprinkler head down and
filled May’s dress.
‘You come over hereand you gonna get wet,’May said, echoingRosaleen, and shecameafter us, pitching thecontents of her skirtacross our backs. Ican tell you
this much: neither one of us protested that loudly. In the end we stood there and let ourselves be drenched by two crazy black women. Allfour of us turned into water
nymphs and danced around the coolspray, just the way it must have been when Indians danced circles around blazing fires. Squirrels and Carolina wrens hopped as
close as they dared and drank fromthe puddles, and you could almost see the blades of brown grass lift themselves up and turn green. Then the porch door banged,
and herecameJune with her dander up. I must have been drunk withwaterand airand dancing, becauseI picked up thesprinklerand said, ‘You come over hereand
you’re gonna get wet.’
Then I hosed her. She began to holler.
‘Damn it to hell!’ I knew this was going down the wrong path, but I couldn’t stop. I was seeing myselfas the fire department and June as the raging inferno. She
yanked the sprinkler out ofmy handsand turned the spray onme. Some ofthe water rushed up my nose and burned. I yanked at the sprinkler, and each of us held on
to one side of it while it blasted away at our stomachs and chins. We went to our knees, wrestling for it, the geyser weaving between us, her eyes staring at me, close
and bright with beads ofwater on hereyelashes. I heard May start to hum‘Oh! Susanna.’
I laughed to let her knowit wasallright, but I wouldn’t let go. I would not letJune Boatwright win. Rosaleen said, ‘They say if you aimthe hose on two locked dogs,
they’llturn loose, but I guess thatain’talways so.’
August laughed, and I saw the softening come around June’seyes, how she was trying not to laugh, but it was like the Dutch boy pulling his finger out ofthe dike—
the minute she softened her eyes, the whole thing collapsed. I could almost see her smack her forehead, thinking, I amwrestling with a fourteen-year-old girl over a
garden sprinkler. This is ridiculous. She let go and sprawled back on the grass in convulsions of laughter. I plopped down next to her and laughed, too. We could not
stop. I wasn’t exactly sure ofeverything we were laughing about—I was just glad we were doing it together. When we got up, June said, ‘Lord, I feel woozy, like
somebody has pulled the plugs inmy feetand drained me out.’
Rosaleen, May, andAugust had returned to the business of beingwater nymphs. I looked back down at the ground where our bodies had lain side by side, the wet
grasses pressed down, perfect depressions in the earth. I stepped over themwith the utmost care, and, seeing how careful I was, June stepped over them, too, and
then, to my shock, she hugged me. June Boatwright hugged me while our clothes made sweet, squishy sounds up and down our bodies. If the heat goes over 104
degrees in South Carolina, you have to go to bed. It is practically the law. Some people might see it as shiftless behavior, but really, when we’re lying down fromthe
heat, we’re giving our minds time to browse around for new ideas, wondering at the true aimof life, and generally letting things pop into our heads that need to. In the
sixth grade there was a boy inmy class who had a steel plate in his skulland was al- ways complaining how test answers could never get through to him. Our teacher
would say, ‘Give mea break.’
In a way, though, the boywas right. Every human being on theface oftheearth hasasteel platein his head, but if you lie down nowand then and getstillas you can,
it will slide open like eleva- tor doors, letting in all the secret thoughts that have been standing around so patiently, pushing the button for a ride to the top. The real
troubles in life happenwhen those hidden doors stay closed for too long. But that’s just my opinion.August, May, June, and Rosaleenweresupposedly over in the pink
house in their rooms lying under the fans with the lights on. In the honey house I reclined on my cot and told myself I could think about anything I wanted, except my
mother, so naturally she was the only thing that wanted on theelevator. Icould feelthings unraveling around me.Allthefraying edge ofthe dreamworld. Pull one wrong
thread and I would bestand- ing inwreckageto my elbows. Ever sinceI’d called T. Ray, I wanted so badly to tellRosaleen about it. To say, If you’ve beenwondering
whether my leaving hascaused T. Ray to examine his heart, orchange his ways, don’t waste your time. But Icouldn’t bringmyselfto admit to her that I’d cared enough
to call him. What was wrongwithmethat I was living hereas ifI had nothing to hide?I lay on thecotand stared at the glaring square ofwindow, exhausted. It takes so
much energy to keep thingsat bay. Letme on, mymother was saying. Letme on the damn elevator. Well, fine. I pulled outmy bag and examined mymother’s picture. I
wondered what it had been like to be inside her, justa curl offlesh swimming in her darkness, the quiet things that had passed between us. The wanting-her was still in
me, but it wasn’t nearly so fierce and raging as before. Pulling on her gloves, I noticed how tight they fit all ofa sudden. By the time I was sixteen, theywould feel like
baby gloves onmy hands. I would be AliceinWonderland after sheatethecakeand grewtwice her size.
My palms would split the seams of the gloves, and I would never wear themagain. I peeled the gloves frommy sweaty hands and felt a wave of jitteriness, the old
saw-edged guilt, the necklace oflies Icould notstop wearing, thefear of being cast out ofthe pink house.
‘No,’I breathed. The word took along timeto work its way to my throat.Ascared whisper. No, I will not think about this. I will not feel this. I will not let this ruin
the way thingsare. No. I decided that lying down fromthe heat wasa hick idea. I gave up and walked to the pink housefor something cold to drink. IfIever managed
to get to heaven after everything I’d done, I hoped I would get just a few minutes for a private conference with God. I wanted to say, Look, I know you meant well
creating the wormand all, but howcould you let it getaway fromyou likethis? Howcome you couldn’t stick with your original idea of paradise? People’s lives werea
mess. When Icameinto the kitchen, Maywas sitting on thefloor with her legs straight outand a box of grahamcrackers in her lap. That would beabout right—meand
May the only two who couldn’t lie peaceful on the bed for five minutes.
‘I saw a roach,’she said, reaching into a bag ofmarshmallows that I hadn’t noticed was there. She pulled one out and pinched off little pieces of it. Crazy May. I
opened therefrigeratorand stood therestaring at thecontents likeI was waiting for the grape-juice bottleto jump inmy hand and say, Here, drink me. Icould not seem
to register what Maywas doing. Sometimes things ofmagnitudesettle over youwith excruciating slowness. Say you break yourankleand don’t feel it hurting till you’ve
walked another block. I had nearly finished a glass ofjuice beforeI let myselflook at thelittle highway of broken grahamcrackersand marshmallowbits that Maywas
constructing across thefloor, howitstarted at thesink and angled toward the door, thick with golden crumbsand smudges ofstickywhite.
‘Theroaches willfollowthis out the door,’ May said.
‘It worksevery time.’
I don’t knowhowlong I stared at theline on thefloor, at May’s faceturned toward mine, eager for meto say something, but Icouldn’t think what to say. Theroom
filled with the steady whir of the refrigerator motor. I felt a strange, thick feeling inside. Amemory. I stood there waiting, letting it come…Your mother was a lunatic
when it came to bugs, T. Ray had said. She used to make trails of grahamcracker crumbs and marshmallows to lure roaches outside. I looked again at May. My
mother couldn’t have learned the roach trick fromMay, I thought. Could she? Ever since I’d set foot in the pink house, some part of me had kept believing that my
mother had been here. No, not believing it so much as daydreaming itand running it through a maze ofwishful thinking. But nowthat theactual possibility seemed to be
right in front ofme, it seemed so far-fetched, crazy. It couldn’t be, I thought again. I walked over and sat down at the table. Shadows fromlate afternoon pushed into
the room. They were peach tinted, fading in and out, and the kitchen was completely silent. Even the refrigerator humhad died away. May had turned back to her
work. She seemed oblivious to me sitting there. Mymother could have learned it froma book, maybe fromher mother. How did I know that households everywhere
didn’t use this particular roach-ridding method? I stood up and walked over to May. I felt a trembly feeling at the back ofmy knees. I put my hand on her shoulder.
Okay, I thought, here goes. I said, ‘May, did you ever knowa Deborah? Deborah Fontanel? Awhite woman fromVirginia?It would have been along timeago.’
There wasn’t a trace ofcunning inMay, and you could depend on her not to overthink her answers. She didn’t look up, didn’t pause, just said, ‘Oh, yes, Deborah
Fontanel. Shestayed out therein the honey house. She was thesweetest thing.’
And there it was. There it allwas. For a moment I felt light-headed. I had to reach for the coun tertop to steadymyself. Down on the floor the trail ofcrumbs and
marshmallows looked halfalive. I had a millionmore questions, but May had started humming ‘Oh! Susanna.’
Sheset down the box ofcrackersand got up slowly, starting to sniffle. Something about Deborah Fontanel had set her off.
‘I think I’ll go out to the wallforalittle while,’shesaid.And that’s howsheleft me, standing in the kitchen, hotand breathless, the world tilted under me. Walking to
the honey house, I concentrated on my feet touching down on the hard-caked dirt in the driveway, the exposed tree roots, fresh-watered grass, how the earth felt
beneathme, solid,alive,ancient, right thereevery time my footcame down. Thereand thereand there,always there. Thethingsa mother should be.
Oh, yes, Deborah Fontanel. She stayed out there in the honey house. She was the sweetest thing. In the honey house I sat on the cot with my knees drawn up,
hugging themwithmy armsand making ashelffor theside ofmy faceto rest on. I looked at thefloorand the walls with brand neweyes. Mymother had walked about
in this room.Areal person. Not somebody I made up butaliving, breathing person. Thelast thing Iexpected was to fallasleep, but when there’sa blowto thesystem,
all the body wants to do is go to sleep and dreamon it. I woke an hour or so later in the velvety space where you don’t yet remember what you’ve dreamed. Then
suddenly the whole thingwashed back to me. I amconstructing a spiraling trail of honey across a roomthat seems to be in the honey house one minute and the next in
my bedroomback in Sylvan. I start itata door I’ve never seen before and end itat the foot ofmy bed. Then I sit on the mattress and wait. The door opens. Inwalks
mymother. Shefollows the honey, making twistsand turnsacross theroomuntilshe gets to my bed. Sheis smiling, so pretty, but then I seesheis nota normal person.
She has roach legs protruding through her clothes, sticking through the cage of her ribs, down her torso, six of them, three on each side. I couldn’t imagine who sat in
my head making this stuff up. The air was nowdusky rose and coolenough fora sheet. I pulled itaround my legs. My stomach felt icky, like I might throwup. IfI told
you right nowthat I never wondered about that dream, neverclosed my eyesand pictured her with roach legs, never wondered why she came to me like that, with her
worst natureexposed, I would be up to my old habit oflying.Aroach isacreature no onecan love, but you cannot kill it. It will go on and on and on. Just try to get rid
ofit. The next fewdays I wasacase of nerves. I jumped out ofmy skin ifsomebody so much as dropped a nickel on thefloor.At the dinner tableI poked at my food
and stared into space like I was in a trance. Sometimes the picture ofmymother with roach legs would leap into my head, and I would have to swallow a spoonful of
honey for my stomach. I was so antsy Icouldn’t sit through five minutes ofAmericanBandstand on television, when ordinarily I was glued to Dick Clark’severyword.
I walked around and around the house, pausing here and there to picture mymother in the various rooms. Sittingwith her skirt spread over the piano bench. Kneeling
beside Our Lady. Studying therecipecollection that May clipped frommagazinesand kept taped on therefrigerator. I would stareat these visions withmy eyes glazed
over, only to look up and seeAugust, or June, or Rosaleenwatchingme. They clucked their tonguesand felt my facefor fever. They said, ‘What’s wrong? What’s got
into you?’
I shook my head.
‘Nothing,’ I lied.
‘Nothing.’
In truth I feltas ifmy life was stranded out on the high dive, about to leap into unknownwaters. Dangerous waters. I onlywanted to postpone the plunge awhile, to
feelmymother’s closeness in the house, to pretend I wasn’t afraid of the story that had brought her here or that she might go and surprise me the way she had in the
dream, turning up six-legged and ugly. I wanted to march up to August and ask why my mother had been here, but fear stopped me. I wanted to know, and I didn’t
want to know. I was all hung up in limbo. Late Friday afternoon, after we had finished cleaning the last of the supers and storing themaway, Zach went out to take a
look under the hood ofthe honeywagon. It was stillacting funny and overheating, in spite ofNeil havingworked on it. I wandered back to my roomand sat onmy cot.
Heat radiated from the window. I considered getting up to turn on the fan but only sat there staring through the panes at the milky-blue sky, a sad, ragged feeling
catching hold inside. I could hear music coming fromthe truck radio, SamCooke singing ‘Another Saturday Night,’ then May calling across the yard to Rosaleen,
something about getting the sheets off the clothesline. And I was struck all at once how life was out there going through its regular courses, and I was suspended,
waiting, caught in a terrible crevice between liw ingmy life and not living it. I couldn’t go on biding time like there was no end of it, no end to this summer. I felt tears
spring up. I would have to come clean. Whatever happened…well, it would just happen. I went over to the sink and washed my face. Taking a deep breath, I stuffed
mymother’s black Mary picture and her photograph into my pocket and started toward the pink house to findAugust. I thought we would sit down on the end of her
bed, or out in thelawn chairs ifthe mosquitoes weren’t bad. I imaginedAugust would say, What’s on your mind, Lily?Are wefinally gonna have our talk?I would pull
out the wooden pictureand tell herevery last thing, and then she would explain about mymother. If only that had happened, instead ofwhat did.As I strodetoward the
house, Zach called to mefromthetruck.
‘Wannarideto townwithme?I’ve gotta geta newradiator hose beforethestorecloses.’
‘I’mgoing to talk to August,’ I said. Heslammed down the hood and smeared his hands frontand back on his pants.
‘August is with Sugar-Girlin the parlor. Sheshowed up crying. Something about Otis using their lifesavings to buy asecondhand fishing boat.’
‘But I’ve gotsomething really important to talk to herabout.’
‘You’ll haveto get in line,’ hesaid.
‘Come on, we’ll be back before Sugar-Girlleaves.’
I hesitated, then gavein.
‘Allright.’
The auto-parts store sat two doors down fromthe movie theater. As Zach pulled into a parking space in front, I saw them—five or six white men standing by the
ticket booth. Theymilled around, casting quick glances up and down the sidewalk, like theywere waiting for someone, all of themso nicely dressed, wearing ties with
clips on themlike store clerks and bank tellers. One man held what looked like the handle froma shovel. Zach turned off the honeywagon and stared at themthrough
the windshield. Adog, an old beagle with an age-white face, wandered out of the auto-parts store and began to sniffat something on the sidewalk. Zach drummed his
fingers on thesteeringwheeland sighed.And I suddenly realized: it was Friday, and theywere out here waiting for Jack Palanceand thecolored woman. Wesat there
a minute not speaking, thesounds in thetruck magnified. Thesqueak in aspring under theseat. Thetapping ofZach’s fingers. Thesharp way I was breathing. Then one
ofthe men yelled,causingmeto jump and bangmy kneeagainst the glovecompartment. He gazed across thestreetand shouted, ‘Whatare you staring at over there?’
Zach and I both turned and looked through the back window. Threeteenaged colored boys stood on thesidewalk, drinkingR. C. Colas out ofthe bottleand glaring
overat the men.
‘Let’scome back another time,’ I said.
‘It’ll be okay,’ Zach said.
‘Youwait here.’
No, it won’t be okay, I thought. As he slid out ofthe honeywagon, I heard the boyscall Zach’s name. They crossed the streetand came over to the honeywagon.
Glancing through the windowatme, they gave Zach afewplayfulshoves. One ofthemwaved his hand in front of his facelike he’d bitten into a Mexican pepper.
‘Who you got in there?’ he said. I looked at them, tried to smile, but mymind was on the men, who Icould see were watching us. The boys sawit, too, and one of
them—who I would later find out was named Jackson—said real loud, ‘You gotta be dumb as dirt to believe Jack Palance is coming to Tiburon,’ and all of them
laughed. EvenZach. The man holding theshovel handle walked right up to thetruck bumperand stared at the boys with that same halfsmile, halfsneer I had seen onT.
Ray’s faceathousand times, thesort oflook conjured frompower without benefit oflove,and he yelled, ‘What did you say, boy?’
The murmuring noise on thestreet fellaway. The beagle dropped hisearsand slunk off undera parked car. I sawJackson bite down, causing atiny rippleacross his
jaw. I sawhimraise his R. C. Cola bottle over his head. And throw it. Iclosed my eyesas it flew out of his hand. When I opened themagain, there was glass sprayed
across thesidewalk. The manwith theshovel handle had dropped itand had his hand over his nose. Blood seeped through his fingers. Heturned back to the other men.
‘That nigger busted open my nose,’ he said, sounding more surprised than anything. He looked around, confused for a moment, then headed into a nearby store,
dripping blood all the way. Zach and the boys stood by the truck door in a little knot, stuck to the pavement, while the rest of the men walked over and formed a half
circlearound them, hemming themin against thetruck.
‘Which one of you threwthat bottle?’ one man said. The boys didn’t open their mouths.
‘Bunch ofcowards,’another man said. This one had picked up the shovel handle fromthe sidewalk and was jabbing it in the air in the boys’ direction every time
theymoved.
‘Just tell us which one of you it was, and you other three can go,’ he said. Nothing. People had started coming out ofthe stores, gathering in clumps. I stared at the
back of Zach’s head. I felt like my heart had a little ledge on it and I was standing there leaning as far out as I could, waiting to see what Zach would do. I knew that
being a snitchwasconsidered the lowest sort of person, but I wanted himto point his fingerand say, The one over there. He did it. That way he could climb back into
the honey truck and we would be on our way. Come on, Zach. Heturned his head and looked at mefromthecorner of hiseye. Then heshrugged his shoulder slightly,
and I knewit was overand done. He would never open his mouth. He was trying to say to me, I’msorry, but theseare my friends. Hechoseto stand thereand be one
ofthem. I watched the policeman put Zach and the other three boys in hiscar. Driving away, heturned on his siren and red light, which seemed unnecessary, but I guess
he didn’t want to disappoint the audience on the sidewalk. I sat in the truck like I had frozen and the world had frozen around me. The crowd faded away, and all the
cars downtown went home one by one. People closed up their stores. I stared through the windshield as if I was watching the test pattern that came on television at
midnight.After theshock wore offsome, I tried to think what to do, howto get home. Zach had taken the keys, or I might’vetried drivingmyself, even though I didn’t
knowgears frombrakes. There wasn’tastore open nowto ask to usea phone, and when I spotted a pay phone down thestreet, I realized I didn’t havea dime. I got
out ofthetruck and walked. When I got to the pink housea half hour later, I sawAugust, June, Rosaleen, Neil, and Clayton Forrest gathered in thelong shadows near
the hydrangeas. The murmur oftheir voices floated up into the dying light. I heard Zach’s name. I heard Mr. Forrestsay the word ‘jail.’
I guessed that Zach had called himwith his one phonecall,and here he was, breaking the news.
Neilstood next to June, which told me they hadn’t reallymeantall that don’t you come back and you selfish bitch that they’d hurled ateach other. I walked toward
them, unnoticed. Someone down the road was burning grass clippings. The whole sky smelled sour green, and stray pieces ofash flicked over my head. Coming up
behind them, I said, ‘August?’
She pulled meto her.
‘Thank goodness. Here you are. I wasabout to comelooking for you.’
I told themwhat had happened as we walked back to the house. August’s armwas around my waist like she was afraid I’d keel over again in a blind faint, but
really, I had never beenmore present. The bluein theshadows, theshape ofthemagainst the house, howthey looked likecertain unkind animals—acrocodile, a grizzly
bear—thesmell ofAlka-Seltzercirculating over Clay- ton Forrest’s head, the white part in his hair, the weight of our iring strapped around ourankles. Wecould hardly
walk for it. We sat in the ladder-back chairsaround the kitchen table, ex- cept for Rosaleen, who poured glasses oftea and seta plate of pimiento-cheese sandwiches
on thetable,as ifanybody could eat. Rosaleen’s hair was done up in perfectcornrowplaits, which I guessed May had donefor herafter supper.
‘Now, whatabout bail?’ Augustsaid. Clayton cleared his throat.
‘Judge Monroeis out oftown on vacation, so nobody is getting out before next Wednesday, it looks l.’
Neil stood up and walked over to the window. His hair was cut in a neat square at the back. I tried to concentrate on it to keep from breaking down. Next
Wednesdaywas five days fromnow. Five days.
‘Well, is heallright?’asked June.
‘He wasn’t hurt, was he?’
‘They only letmesee himfora minute,’ said Clayton.
‘But heseemed allright.’
Outside, the night sky was moving over us. I was aware of it, aware of the way Clayton had said he seemed all right, as if we all understood he wasn’t but would
pretend otherwise.Augustclosed hereyes, used her fingers to smooth out theskin on her forehead. I sawashiny filmacross hereyes the beginning oftears. Looking at
her eyes, I could see a fire inside them. It was a hearth fire you could depend on, you could draw up to and get warmby if youwere cold, or cook something on that
would feed the emptiness in you. I felt like we were alladrift in the world, and allwe had was the wet fire inAugust’seyes. But it wasenough. Rosaleen looked at me,
and Icould read her thoughts. Just because you broke me out ofjail, don’t getany bright ideasabout Zach. I understood howpeople becamecareercriminals. Thefirst
crime was the hardest. After that you’rethinking, What’s one more? Afewmore years in theslammer. Big deal.
‘Whatare you gonna do about this?’said Rosaleen, standing beside Clayton, looking down at him. Her breasts sat on her stomach, and her fists were planted in her
hips. She looked like she wanted usall to fill our lips with snuffand go directly to the Tiburon jailand spit on people’s shoes. It was plain Rosaleen had fire in her, too.
Not hearth fire, like August, but fire that burns the house down, if necessary, to clean up the mess inside it. Rosaleen reminded me of the statue of Our Lady in the
parlor,and I thought, IfAugust is thered heart onMary’schest, Rosaleen is thefist.
‘I’ll do my best to get himout,’ said Clayton, ‘but I’mafraid he’s got to stay in therealittle while.’
I reached into my pocketand felt the black Mary picture, remembering thethings I’d planned to say toAugustabout mymother. But howcould I do that now, with
this terriblething happening to Zach? Everything I wanted to saywould haveto wait,and I’d go back to thesamesuspended animation I’d been in before.
‘I don’tsee whyMay needs to knowabout this,’ Junesaid.
‘It will do her in. You knowhowsheloves that boy.’
Every one of us turned to look at August.
‘You’reright,’ shesaid.
‘It would betoo much for May.’
‘Whereis she?’ Iasked.
‘In her bed,asleep,’ Rosaleen said.
‘She was worn out.’
I remembered I had seen her in the afternoon, out by the wall, pulling a load of stones in the wagon. Building onto her wall. As if she sensed a new addition was
called for. The jail in Tiburon did not have curtains like the one in Sylvan. It was concrete-block gray, withmetalwindows and poor lighting. I told myselfit was an act
ofstupidity to go inside. I wasa fugitive fromjustice, and here I was breezing into a jailwhere there were probably policemen trained to recognize me. ButAugust had
asked if I wanted to come with her to visit Zach. How was I going to say anything but yes to that? The policeman inside had a crew cut and was very tall, taller than
Neil,and Neilwas Wilt Chamberlain size. He didn’tseemespecially glad to see us.
‘Are you his mother?’ heasked August. I looked at his nametag. Eddie Hazelwurst.
‘I’mhis godmother,’ Augustsaid, standing very erect, likeshe was having her heightmeasured.
‘And this isafriend ofthefamily.’
Hiseyes passed over me. The only thing heseemed suspiciousabout was howa girlas whiteas mecould beafriend ofthefamily. He picked up a brown clipboard
froma desk and popped thefastener up and downwhile hetried to decide what to do with us.
‘Allright, you can havefive minutes,’ hesaid. He opened a door into acorridor that led to asinglerowoffour jailcells, each ofthemholding a black boy. Thesmell
ofsweating bodiesand sour urinalsalmost overpowered me. I wanted to bringmy fingers up to pinchmy nose, but I knewthat would bethe worst insult. They couldn’t
help that they smelled. They sat on benchlikecots hooked along the wall, staring at usas we passed. One boywas throwing a button against the wall, playing some kind
of game. Hestopped whenwecame by. Mr. Hazelwurst led us to thelastcell.
‘Zach Taylor, you got visitors,’ he said, then glanced at his watch. When Zach stepped toward us, I wondered if he’d been hand- cuffed, fingerprinted,
photographed, pushed around. I wanted so much to reach through the bars and touch him, to press my fingers against his skin, because it seemed only by touch that I
could besureall this wasactually happening. When it wasapparent Mr. Hazelwurst wasn’t leaving,August began to speak. Shespokeabout one ofthe hives she kept
over on the Haney farm, howit had up and swarmed.
‘You knowthe one,’ shesaid.
‘The onethat had trouble withmites.’
She went into minute detailabout the way she’d searched high and low, into the dusk hours, combing the woods out past the watermelon fields, finally finding the
bees in a magnoliasapling, the wholeswarmhanging therelikea black balloon caught in the branches.
‘I used thefunnelto drop themin aswarmbox,’ shesaid, ‘then I hived themagain.’
I think she was trying to put it in Zach’s mind that she would never rest till he was back home with us. Zach listened with hiseyes watery brown. Heseemed relieved
to keep the conversation on the level of bee swarms. I’d worked on lines I wanted to say to him, too, but in the mo ment I couldn’t remember them. I stood by while
August asked himquestions—how was he doing, what did he need? I watched him, filled with tenderness and ache, wondering what it was that connected us. Was it
the wounded places down inside peoplethat soughteach other out, that bred a kind oflove between them? WhenMr. Hazelwurst said, ‘Time’s up, let’s go,’Zach cast
hiseyes inmy direction.Avein stuck out rightabove his temple. I watched it quiver, the blood pulsing through it. I wanted to say something helpful, to tell himwe were
more alike than he knew, but it seemed ridiculous to say that. I wanted to reach through the bars and touch the vein with the blood rushing through it. But I didn’t do
thateither.
‘Are you writing in your notebook?’ he asked, his face and voice suddenly, oddly, desperate. I looked at himand nodded. In the next cell, the boy—Jack- son—
madea noise,a kind ofcatcall, thatcaused the moment to seemsilly and cheap. Zach shot himan angry look.
‘Come on, you’ve had your five minutes,’ the policeman said.
August placed her hand onmy back, nudgingmeto leave. Zach seemed as if he wanted to ask mesomething. He opened his mouth, then closed it.
‘I’llwritethisall down for you,’ I said.
‘I’ll put it in astory.’
I don’t knowifthat’s what he wanted to ask me, but it’s something everybodywants—for someoneto seethe hurt doneto themand set it down likeit matters. We
went around not bothering to smile, even in front of May. When she was in the room, we didn’t talk about Zach, but we didn’t act like the world was fine and rosy
either. Juneresorted to hercello, the way shealways did when sorrowcamealong.And walking to the honey house one morning,August stopped and stared at thetire
ruts in the driveway left by Zach’scar. The way shestood there, I thought she might start to cry. Everything I did felt heavy and difficult—drying the dishes, kneeling for
evening prayers, even pulling down the sheets to get into bed. On the second day ofthe month ofAugust, after the supper dishes were washed up, and the HailMarys
had been done,August said, No more moping tonight, we’re going to watch Ed Sullivan.And that’s what we were doingwhen the phonerang. To this dayAugustand
June wonder how our lives would have been different if one of themhad answered the phone instead of May. I remember thatAugust made a move to answer it, but
Maywasclosest to the door.
‘I’ll get it,’she said. No one thought a thing about it. We fixed our eyes on the television, onMr. Sullivan, who introduced a circus act involvingmonkeys that rode
tiny scootersacrossa highwire. WhenMay stepped back into theroomafewminutes later, hereyeszigzagged fromfaceto face.
‘That was Zach’s mother,’ shesaid.
‘Why didn’t you tellmeabout himgetting put in jail?’
Shelooked so normalstanding there. Fora moment none of us moved. We watched her like we were waiting for theroofto cavein. But May just stood there, calm
as shecould be. I started thinkingmaybesomesort ofmiracle had taken placeand she’d somehowgotten cured.
‘You allright?’ said August,easing to her feet. May didn’tanswer.
‘May?’Junesaid. Ieven smiled overat Rosaleen and nodded, as ifto say, Can you believe howwellshe’s taking this?August, though, turned offthetelevision and
studied May, frowning. May’s head wasangled to theside,and hereyes werefixed on across-stitched picture ofa birdhousethat hung on the wall. Itstruck meall ofa
sudden that hereyes weren’tactually seeing the picture. They had glazed completely over. August went over to May.
‘Answer me. Are you allright?’
In the silence I heard May’s breathing growloud and a little ragged. She took severalsteps backward, untilshe came to the wall. Then she slid down onto the floor
without making asound. I’mnot sure when it sank in that May had gone offto some unreachable placeinside herself. EvenAugustand June didn’t realizeit rightaway.
They called her namelikeshe’d only lost her hearing. Rosaleen bent over May and spokein aloud voice, trying to get through to her.
‘Zach is gonna beallright. You don’t need to worry any. Mr. Forrest is getting himout ofjail onWednesday.’
May stared straightahead like Rosaleenwasn’teven there.
‘What’s happened to her?’ Juneasked,and Icould heara note of panicin her voice.
‘I’ve never seen her likethis.’
Maywas here but not here. Her hands lay limp in her lap, palms up. No sobbing into her dress skirt. No rocking back and forth. No pulling at her hair braids. She
was so quiet, so different. I turned my face to the ceiling, I just couldn’t watch. August went to the kitchen and came back with a dish towel filled with ice. She pulled
May’s head to her so it rested against her shoulder fora minute, and then shelifted her sister’s faceand pressed thetowelto May’s forehead and templesand along her
neck. She kept on doing this for severalminutes, then put the cloth down and tapped May’s cheeks with her hands. May blinked a time or two and looked atAugust.
Shelooked atall of us, huddled above her,as ifshe werereturning fromalong trip.
‘You feel better?’ said August. May nodded.
‘I’ll be okay.’
Her wordscame out in an odd monotone.
‘Well, I’mglad to see you can talk,’ said June.
‘Come on, let’s get you in the bathtub.’
Augustand June pulled May to her feet.
‘I’mgoing to the wall,’ May said. Juneshook her head.
‘It’s getting dark.’
‘Just fora little while,’May said. She moved into the kitchen, with all of us following after her. She opened a cabinet drawer, took outa flashlight, her tablet, a stub
ofa pencil, and walked onto the porch. I pictured her writing it down—Zach in jail—and pushing it into a crevice in the wall. I felt somebody should personally thank
every rock out there for the humanmisery it had absorbed. We should kiss themone by one and say, We are sorry, but something strong and lasting had to do this for
May,and you arethechosen ones. God bless your rock hearts.
‘I’ll go with you,’ said August. May spoke over her shoulder.
‘No, please, August, justme.’
Auguststarted to protest.
‘But—’
‘Justme,’ said May, turning to face us.
‘Justme.’ We watched her go down the porch steps and move into the trees. In life there are things you can’t get over no matter how hard you try, and that sight is one of
them. Maywalking into thetrees with thelittlecircle oflight bobbing in front of her, then swallowed up by the dark.
I
Chapter Ten
A bee’s life is but short. During spring and summer—the most strenuous periods of foraging—a worker bee, as a rule, does not live more than four or five
weeks…Threatened by all kinds of dangers during their foraging flights, manyworkers die beforethey havereached even thatage. —The DancingBees
sat in the kitchen withAugust, June, and Rosaleen while the night spread out around the house. May had been gone a whole five minutes whenAugust got up and
began to pace. She walked out to the porch and back and then stared out toward the wall. After twentyminutes shesaid, ‘That’s it. Let’s go get her.’
She got the flashlight fromthe truck and struck out for the wall, while June, Rosaleen, and I hurried to keep pace. Anight bird was singing froma tree branch, just
singing its heart out, urgentand feverish, likeit was put thereto sing the moon up to thetop ofthesky.
‘Ma-a-a-a-y,’calledAugust. June called, too, then Rosaleen and me. We wentalong shouting her name, but no sound came back. Just the night bird singing up the
moon.After we walked fromoneend ofthe wailingwall to the other, we went back and walked itagain, likethis time we were going to get it right. Walk slower, look
closer, call louder. This time May would be there kneeling with the flashlight batteries burned out. We would think, My goodness, how did we miss her here the first
time? That didn’t happen, though, so we walked into the woods behind the wall, calling her name louder and louder till I could hear the hoarseness creeping into our
throats, but not one of us would say, Something is terribly wrong. Despite the night, the heat had lingered on bad as ever, and I could smell the hot dampness of our
bodies as we combed the woods with a spot of light four inches across. FinallyAugust said, ‘June, you go to the house and call the police. Tell themwe need help to
find our sister. When you hang up, you kneel before Our Lady and beg her to watch over May, then you come back. We’re going to walk toward theriver.’
June took off running. We could hear her crashing through the brush as we turned toward the back of the property where the river flowed. August’s legs moved
fasterand faster. Rosaleen struggled to keep up, gulping forair. When we reached the river, we stood there a moment. I’d been in Tiburon long enough for the fullmoon to fade away and grow back fullagain. It hung over the
river, sliding in and out ofclouds. I stared ata tree on the opposite bank, where the roots were exposed and twisted, and felta metallic-dry taste rise fromthe back of
my throatand slide over my tongue. I reached for August’s hand, butshe had turned rightand was moving along the bank,callingMay’s name.
‘Ma-a-a-ay.’
Rosaleen and I moved behind her in ourclumsy knot, so close we must haveseemed to the nightcreatures like one big organismwith six legs. I was surprised when
the prayer wesaid after dinnereach night, the one with the beads, started up ofits own accord and recited itselfin the back reaches ofmy head. Icould heareachword
plainly. HailMary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou amongwomen, and blessed is thefruit ofthywomb, Jesus. HolyMary, mother ofGod, pray for
us sinners, now and at the hour of our death. Amen. It wasn’t tillAugust said, ‘Good, Lily, we should all pray,’ that I realized I’d been repeating it out loud. I couldn’t
tell ifI was saying itasa prayer or muttering itasa way to push down the fear. August said the words withme, and thenRosaleen did, too. We walked along the river
with the words streaming behind us like ribbons in the night. When June came back, she was holding another flashlight she’d dug up somewhere at the house. The
puddle oflight wobbled as shecamethrough the woods.
‘Over here,’called August,aiming her flashlight up through thetrees. We waited for Juneto reach theriverbank.
‘The policeare on their way,’ shesaid. The policearecoming. I looked at Rosaleen,at theends of her mouth turned down. The police hadn’t recognized methe day
I’d visited thejail; I hoped they didn’t get luckywithRosaleen. Juneshouted May’s nameand plowed up theriverbank into the dark, followed byRosaleen, butAugust
moved slowly now, carefully. I stayed close behind her, saying Hail Marys to myself, faster and faster. SuddenlyAugust stopped in her tracks. I stopped, too. And I
didn’t hear the night bird singing anymore. I watchedAugust, not takingmy eyes off her. She stood tense and alert, staring down at the bank. At something Icould not
see.
‘June,’ she called in a strange, whispery voice, but June and Rosaleen had pushed farther up the riverbank and didn’t hear. Only I heard. The air felt thick and
charged, too thick to breathe. I stepped over besideAugust, lettingmy elbowtouch herarm, needing the weight of her next to me;and there was May’s flashlight, shut
offand sitting on the wet ground. Itseems odd to me nowhowwe went on standing thereanother minute, me waiting forAugust to say something, butshe didn’t speak,
just stood, soaking up that last moment. Awind rose up, raking its sound along the tree branches, hitting our faces like an oven blast, like the sudden breezes of hell.
August looked at me, then moved her flashlight beamout to the water. The light swept across the surface, making a spatter of inkgold splotches before it stopped,
abruptly. May lay in theriver, just beneath thesurface. Hereyes were wide open and unblinking,and theskirt of her dress fanned outand swayed in thecurrent. I heard
a noise come fromAugust’s lips, a soft moan. I clutched frantically at August’s arm, but she pulled free of me, threw down her flashlight, and waded into the river. I
splashed in after her. Water surged around my legs, causing me to fall once on the slippery bottom. I grabbed for August’s skirt, just missing. I came up sputtering. When I reached her, August was staring down at her baby sister.
‘June,’ sheshouted.
‘June!’ May lay in two feet ofwater with a hugeriver stone on top of herchest. It weighted her body, holding it on the bottom. Looking at her, I thought, She will get
up now. August willrollaway the stone, and Maywillcome up forair, and we will go back to the house andget her dry. I wanted to reach down and touch her, shake
her shoulder a little. She couldn’t have died out here in the river. That would be impossible. The only parts of her not submerged were her hands. They floated, her
palms little ragged cups bobbing on the surface, the water weaving in and out of her fingers. Even now that’s the picture that will wake me up in the night, not May’s
eyes, open and staring, or the stone resting on her like a grave slab. Her hands. June came thrashing into the water. When she reached May, she stood besideAugust,
panting, herarms dangling beside her body.
‘Oh, May,’she whispered and looked away, squeezing hereyesclosed. Glancing toward the bank, I sawRosaleen standing ankle deep in theriver, her whole body
shaking. August knelt down in the water and shoved the stone off May’s chest. Grabbing May by the shoulders, she pulled her up. Her body made an awfulsucking
sound as it broke the surface. Her head rolled back, and I saw that her mouth was partially open and her teeth were rimmed with mud. River reeds clung to her hair
braids. I looked away. I knewthen. Maywas dead. August knew, too, but she put herear to May’schest, listening. Aftera minute, though, she drew back and pulled
May’s head to her breast,and italmostseemed likeshe wanted May to listen nowfor her heart.
‘We’ve lost her,’August said. I started to shiver. Icould hear my teeth inmymouth, crashing againsteach other. Augustand June scooped theirarms under May’s
body and struggled to carry her to the bank. She was saturated, bulging. I grabbed her ankles and tried to steady them. The river, it seemed, had carried away her
shoes. When they laid her down on the bank, water gushed from her mouth and nostrils. I thought, This is the way Our Lady came washing up on the river near
Charleston. I thought, Look at her fingers, her hands. They are so precious. I imagined how May had rolled the rock fromthe bank out into the river, then lay down,
pulling it on top of her. She had held it tight, likea baby,and waited for her lungs to fill. I wondered ifshe had flailed and jerked toward thesurfaceat thelastsecond, or
did she go without fighting,embracing therock, letting itsoak up allthe pain shefelt?I wondered about thecreatures that had swumbywhileshe died.
JuneandAugust, soppingwet, stooped on either side of her, while mosquitoes sang in ourearsand theriver went on about its business, coiling offinto the darkness.
I was sure they’d pictured May’s last moments, too, but I did not see horror on their faces now, just a heartbroken acceptance. This had been the thing they’d been
waiting for halftheir lives withouteven realizing it. August tried to close May’seyes with her fingers, but theywould only stay halfshut.
‘It’s just like April,’ Junesaid.
‘Hold theflashlight onMay for me,’August said to her. The wordscame out quietand steady. Icould barely hear themover the bamming ofmy heart. By thesmall
beamof light, August plucked out the tiny green leaves stuck in the plaits inMay’s hair and tucked each one into her pocket. Augustand June scraped offevery piece
of river debris there was fromMay’s skin and clothes, and Rosaleen, poor Rosaleen, who I realized had lost her new best friend, stood, not making a sound, but with
her chin shaking so awful I wanted to reach up and hold it for her. Then a sound I will never forget whooshed out of May’s mouth—a long, bubbling sigh, and we all
looked at each other, confused, with a second ofactual hope, as if the miracle ofmiracles was about to take place after all, but it was only a pocket ofswallowed air
that had suddenly been released. It sweptacross my face, smelling liketheriver, likea piece of old wood that had gone moldy. I looked down at May’s faceand felta
wave of nausea. Stumbling off into the trees, I bent over and vomited. Afterward, as I wiped my mouth on the hemof my shirt, I heard a sound break through the
darkness, acry so piercing it madethe bottomofmy heart drop. Looking back, I sawAugust framed in thelight ofJune’s flashlight, thesound coming fromdeep in her
throat. When it faded away, she dropped her head straight down onto May’s soggy chest. I reached for the limb ofa smallcedarand held tight, as though everything I
had wasabout to slip frommy hands.
‘So you’rean orphan?’the policeman said. It was that tall, crewcut Eddie Hazelwurst who’d escortedAugustand mein to see Zach in jail. Rosaleen and I sat in the
rocking chairs in the parlor, while he stood before us holding a small notebook, ready to capture every word. The other policeman was outside searching around the
wailingwall, for what Icouldn’t imagine. My chair rocked so fast I was in danger of being pitched out ofit. Rosaleen’s, however, remained motionless—her faceclosed
down. Whenwe’d first gotten back to the houseafter findingMay, August had met both policemen and then sentmeand Rosaleen upstairs.
‘Go on up thereand get dried off,’she’d said to me. I’d peeled offmy shoesand rubbed myselfwith atowelwhile westood at the upstairs window. We’d watched
the men fromthe ambulance bring May back fromthe woods on a stretcher, then listened as the two policemen asked August and June all sorts of questions. Their
voices had floated up the stairwell. Yes, she’s been depressed lately. Well, actually, she was depressed on and offall the time. She had a condition. She couldn’t seem
to distinguish other people’s suffering fromher own. No, we didn’t find a note.An au- topsy?Allright, we understand. Mr. Hazelwurst had wanted to talk to everyone,
so here we were. I’d told himexactly what happened fromthe time May answered the telephone to the moment we found her in the river. Then he started with the
personal questions. Wasn’t I that girlwho came to the jail last week to see one of the colored boys? What was I doing staying here? Who was Rosaleen? I explained
everything about mymother dyingwhen I was small, my father going to his Maker earlier this summer after a tractor accident, whichwas the story I was stickingwith.
Rosa- leen, I said, was my nanny.
‘I guess you could say I’man orphan,’ I told him.
‘But I’ve got family inVirginia. It was my father’s dyingwish for meto go live withmy aunt Bernie. She’sexpectingmeand Rosaleen both. She’ll besending us bus
fare or driving down hereand picking us up herself. She keeps saying, ‘Lily, Ican’t wait for you to get here.’
I tell her, ‘Justso we’rethere beforeschoolstarts.’
I’ll beasophomore, which Icannot believe.’
He narrowed his eyes like he was trying to follow all this. I was breaking every rule ofsuccessful lying. Do not talk so much, I told myself, but I couldn’t seemto
stop.
‘I amso happy about going to live with her up there. She is real nice. You wouldn’t believe all the stuffshe has sent me over the years. Especially costume jewelry
and teddy bears. One bearafteranother.’
I was only gladAugustand June were not present to hear this. They had left to followtheambulancein the honeywagon, wanting to see May’s body delivered safe
and sound to wherever it was going. It was bad enough Rosaleen was in the room. I was afraid she was going to give us away, say something like Actually we came
hererightafter Lily broke me out ofjail. Butshesat drawn into herself,acomplete mute.
‘Now, what was your last nameagain?’ hesaid.
‘Williams,’ I said. I had told himthis twice already, so I had to wonder what kind ofeducational requirements they had for policemen in Tiburon. It looked like the
same onesas Sylvan. He drewup even taller.
‘Well, what I don’t understand is, if you’re going to live with youraunt inVirginia, whatare you doing here?’
Hereis thetranslation:Iamcompletely confused whata white girllike you is doing staying in acolored house. I took a breath.
‘Well, see, my aunt Bernie had to have an op- eration. It was female trouble. So Rosaleen over there said, ‘Why don’t me and you stay with my friend August
Boatwright inTiburon tillAunt Bernie gets on her feetagain?’
‘It was no sensein us going up there whileshe was in the hospital.’
He wasactuallywriting this down. Why?I wanted to yellat him, This is notabout meand Rosaleen andAunt Bernie’s operation. This isabout May. Sheis dead, or
haven’t you noticed?I should’ve been inmy roomright then cryingmy eyeballs out,and hereI was having thestupidestconversation ofmy life.
‘Didn’t you haveanywhite people back in Spartanburg you could staywith?’
Translation:Anythingwould be better than you staying in acolored house.
‘No, sir, not really. I didn’t have that many friends. For some reason I didn’t fit in that wellwith the crowd. I think it wascause I made such good grades. One lady
atchurch said Icould stay theretillAunt Bernie got well, but then she gotshingles,and there went that.’
Lord God, somebody stop me. Helooked at Rosaleen.
‘So howdid you knowAugust?’
I held my breath,awarethatmy rocking chair had cometo astandstill.
‘She’s my husband’s firstcousin,’ Rosaleen said.
‘Meand her kept up after my husband leftme. August was the only one of his familywho knewwhatasorry jackass he was.’
Shecut hereyesat me as ifto say, See?You aren’t the only one who can concoct liesat the drop ofa hat. He flipped his notebook shutand, crooking his fingerat
me, motioned meto followhimto the door.After hestepped outside, hesaid, ‘Take my adviceand call yourauntand tell her to come on and get you, even ifsheisn’t
a hundred percent well. Thesearecolored people here. You understand what I’msaying?’
I wrinkled up my forehead.
‘No, sir, I’mafraid I don’t.’
‘I’mjustsaying it’s not natural, that you shouldn’t be…well, lowering yourself.’
‘Oh.’
‘I’mgonnacome back soon,and I better not find you still here. Okay?’
Hesmiled and put his gigantic hand onmy head like we weretwo white people with asecret understanding.
‘Okay.’
Iclosed the door behind him. Whatever glue had kept me together throughoutall thatcracked then. I walked back into the parlor, already starting to sob. Rosaleen
put herarmaround me, and I saw tears coming down her face, too. We walked up the stairs to the roomshe’d shared withMay. Rosaleen pulled down the sheets on
her bed.
‘Go on, get in,’ shetold me.
‘But where will you sleep?’
‘Right over here,’she answered, pulling back the covers onMay’s bed, the pink-and-brown afghanMay had crocheted with popcorn stitches. Rosaleen climbed in
and pushed her face into the creases of the pillow. I knew she was smelling for May’s scent. You’d think I would have dreamed about May, but when I fellasleep, it
was Zachwho came. Ican’teven tell youwhat was happening in the dream. I woke up, my breath panting alittle, and I knewit had been about him. Heseemed close
and real, likeIcould sit up and touchmy fingertips to hischeek. Then I remembered where he was, and an unbearable heavinesscame over me. I pictured hiscot with
his shoes sitting under it, how he was probably lying awake this verymoment watching the ceiling, listening to the other boys breathe. Across the rooma rustling noise
startled me, and I had one ofthosestrange moments where you don’t knowquite where you are. Only halfawake, I’d thought I was in the honey house, but itcameto
me nowthat thesound was Rosaleen turning over in bed.And then, then I remembered May. I remembered her in theriver. I had to get up, slip into the bathroom, and
throw water onmy face. I was standing there with the night-light casting its small brightness when I looked down and saw the claw-footed tub wearing the red socks
May had put on its porcelain feet. I smiled then; I couldn’t help it. It was the side of May I never wanted to forget. I closed my eyes, and all the best pictures of her
came to me. I saw her corkscrew braids glistening in the sprinkler, her fingers arranging the graham-cracker crumbs, working so hard on behalf ofa single roach’s life.
And that hat she wore the day she danced the conga line with the Daughters ofMary. Mostly, though, I saw the blaze of love and anguish that had come so often into
her face. In the end it had burned her up. After the autopsy, after the police made her suicide official, after the funeral home had fixed May up as pretty as they could,
she came home to the pink house. First thing Wednesday morning, August 5, a black hearse pulled up in the driveway, and four men in dark suits lifted out May’s
casket and brought it right into the parlor. When I asked August why May was coming through the front door in her coffin, she said, ‘We’re going to sit with her till
she’s buried.’
I hadn’texpected this, asall the peopleI knewin Sylvan had their dead loved ones go straight fromthefuneral hometo the graveyard.August said, ‘Wesit with her
so wecan tell her good-bye. It’scalled a vigil. Sometimes people havea hard timeletting death sink in, they can’tsay good-bye. Avigil helps us do that.’
If the dead person is right there in your living room, it would certainly make things sink in better. It was strange to think about a dead person in the house, but if it
helped us say good-bye better, then okay, Icould seethe point ofit.
‘It helps May, too,’ Augustsaid.
‘Helps May?’
‘You knowweall haveaspirit, Lily,and whenwe die, it goes back to God, but nobody really knows howlong that takes. Maybeit takesasplitsecond,and maybe
it takesa week or two. Anyway, whenwesit withMay, we’resaying, ‘It’s okay, May, we knowthis is your home, but you can go now. It’ll beallright.’
‘August had themroll thecoffin, which sat on its own table withwheels, in front ofOur Lady ofChainsand then open it up.After thefuneral home men droveaway,
Augustand Rosaleenwalked up to thecoffin and stared down at May, but I hung back. I was walking around, inspectingmyselfin the various mirrors, when Junecame
downwith hercello and began to play. She played ‘Oh! Susanna,’whichmadeall of us smile. Thereis nothing likeasmall jokeata vigil to help you relax. I walked up
to the coffin and stood betweenAugust and Rosaleen. It was the same old May, except her skin was pulled tight across her face bones. The lamplight spilling into the
coffin gave her a kind of glow. They had her wearing a royal blue dress I had never seen, with pearl buttons and a boat-neck collar, and her blue hat. She looked like
any second she would pop open her eyes and grin at us. This was the woman who’d taught mymother everything there was to know about getting rid of roaches in a
nice way. I counted onmy fingers the days since May had told me about mymother staying here. Six. It seemed like sixmonths. I stillwanted so badly to tellAugust
what I knew. I guess Icould’ve told Rosa- leen, but it was reallyAugust I wanted to tell. She was the only one who knew whatany ofit meant. Standing at the coffin,
looking up atAugust, I had a powerful urge to tell her right then. Just blurt it out. I’mnot Lily Williams, I’mLily Owens, and it was mymother who stayed here. May
told me. And then it would allcome out. Whatever terrible things might happen, would. When I peered up at her, though, she was brushing tears off her face, looking
for a handkerchiefin her pocket, and I knew it would be selfish to pour this into her cup when it was already to the brimwith grieffor May. June played with her eyes
closed, as if May’s spirit getting into heaven depended solely on her. You have never heard such music, how it made us believe death was nothing but a doorway.
Augustand Rosaleen finally sat down, but onceI was up at thecoffin, I found Icouldn’t leave. May’sarms werecrossed over herchest, wings folded in on themselves,
a pose I did not find flattering. I reached in and held her hand. It was waxy-cool, but I didn’tcare. I hope youwill be happier in heaven, I told her. I hope youwill not
need any kind ofwall up there.And if you see Mary, Our Lady, tell her we knowJesus is the main one down here, but we’re doing our best to keep her memory going.
For some reason I felt exactly like May’s spirit was hovering in a corner of the ceiling hearing every word, even though I wasn’t speaking out loud. And I wish you
would look up mymother, I said. Tell her you saw me, that I’mat least away fromT. Ray for the time being. Say this to her: ‘Lily would appreciate a sign letting her
knowthat you love her. It doesn’t haveto beanything big, but pleasesend something.’
I let out a long breath, still holding her dead hand, thinking how big her fingers felt in mine. So I guess this is good-bye, I told her. Ashudder went through me, a
burning along my eyelashes. Tears fell offmy cheeks and spotted her dress. Before I left her, though, I rearranged her a little. I folded her hands together and tucked
themunder herchin likeshe was thinking seriously about thefuture.At ten o’clock that morning, whileJune was playingmoresongs for May, and Rosaleenwas poking
around in the kitchen, I sat on the back-porch steps withmy notebook, trying to write everything down, but really I was watching forAugust. She had gone out to the
wailingwall. I pictured her out there working her pain into thespacesaround thestones. By thetimeI spotted hercoming back, I’d stopped writing and was doodling in
the margins. She paused halfway across the yard and stared toward the driveway, shielding hereyes fromthesun.
‘Look who’s here!’she yelled, breaking into a run. I had never seenAugust run before, and I could not believe how quickly she crossed the grass with her loping
strides, her long legs stretched out under her skirt.
‘It’s Zach!’ she shouted at me, and I dropped my notebook and flew down the steps. I heard Rosaleen behind me in the kitchen shouting to June that Zach was
here, heard June’s music stop in the middle ofa note. When I got to the driveway, he was climbing out of Clayton’s car. August wrapped himup in her arms. Clayton
stared at the ground and smiled. WhenAugust turned Zach loose, I saw howmuch skinnier he looked. He stood there watchingme. I couldn’t read the expression on
his face. I walked up to him, wishing I knewtheright thing to say.Abreezetossed a piece ofmy hairacross my face, and hereached outand brushed itaway. Then he
pulled me hard against hischestand held meforafewmoments.
‘Are you allright?’ Junesaid, rushing up and cupping his jawin her hand.
‘We’ve beenworried sick.’
‘I’mfine now,’ Zach said. But something I couldn’t put my finger on had evaporated fromhis face. Clayton said, ‘The girl who sells tickets at the theater—well,
apparently she saw the whole thing. It took her long enough, but she finally told the police which one ofthe boys threw the bottle. So they dropped the chargesagainst
Zach.’
‘Oh, thank God,’ said August,and every one of us seemed to breathe outallat once.
‘We just wanted to come by and say how sorrywe are about May,’Clayton said. He embracedAugust, then June. When he turned to me, he placed his hands on
my shoulders, notan embrace, butclose.
‘Lily, howniceto see you again,’ hesaid, then looked at Rosaleen, who was hanging back by thecar.
‘You, too, Rosaleen.’
August took Rosaleen’s hand and pulled her over, then went on holding it, the way she used to hold May’s sometimes, and it struck me that she loved Rosaleen.
Thatshe would liketo change Rosaleen’s nameto July and bring her into their sisterhood.
‘I couldn’t believe it when Mr. Forrest told me about May,’said Zach. Walking back to the house so Clayton and Zach could take their turns beside the casket, I
was thinking, I wish I’d rolled my hair. I wish I’d done it in one ofthose new, beehive hairdos. We all gathered around May. Clayton bowed his head, but Zach stared
into her face. We stood there and stood there. Rosaleenmade a little humming sound, I think out ofawkwardness, but eventually she stopped. I looked over at Zach,
and thetears were pouring down hischeeks.
‘I’msorry,’ hesaid.
‘It wasallmy fault. IfI’d turned in the one who threwthe bottle, I wouldn’t have gotten arrested and none ofthis would’ve happened.’
I had thoughtmaybe he would never find out it was hisarrest thatsent May to theriver. But that had been too much to hopefor.
‘Who told you?’ I said. He waved his hand likeit didn’tmatter.
‘Mymother heard it fromOtis. She didn’t want to tellme, butshe knewI’d hear it fromsomewhere, sooner or later.’
He wiped his face.
‘I just wish I’d—‘ August reached over and touched Zach’s arm. She said, ‘Well, now, I guess I could say if I’d told May fromthe beginning about you getting
arrested, instead of keeping it fromher, none ofthis would’ve happened. Or ifI’d stopped May fromgoing out to the wall that night, none ofthis would’ve happened. What ifI hadn’t waited so long before going out thereand getting her—‘ Shelooked down at May’s body.
‘It was Maywho did it, Zach.’
I wasafraid, though, the blame would find a way to stick to them. That’s howblame was.
‘Icould use your help right nowto drapethe hives,’ Augustsaid to Zach as they started to leave.
‘You remember like we did whenEsther died?’
Looking overatme, shesaid, ‘Esther wasa Daughter ofMarywho died last year.’
‘Sure, Ican stay and help,’ said Zach.
‘Youwannacome, Lily?’ Augustasked.
‘Yes, ma’am.’
Draping the hives—I had no idea what that was, but you couldn’t have paid me fifty dollars to miss it. After Clayton said good-bye, we fastened on our hats and
veilsand went out to the hives, bearing armloads of black crepe mate- rialcut in giant squares.August showed us howto drapeasquare overeach hive box, securing it
with a brick and making sure weleft the bees’entrance door open. I watched howAugust stood a moment beforeeach hive with her fingers knitted together under her
chin. Exactlywhatare we doing this for?I wanted to know, but it seemed likea holy ritualI shouldn’t interrupt. Whenwe had all the hivescovered, westood under the
pines and gazed at them, this little town of black buildings. Acity of mourning. Even the humming turned gloomy under the black drapes, low and long like foghorns
must sound going across theseaat night.August pulled off her hatand walked to thelawn chairs in the backyard withmeand Zach tagging behind her. Wesat with the
sun behind us, staring out toward the wailingwall.
‘Along timeago beekeepersalwayscovered their hives when someonein their family died,’ said August.
‘Howcome?’ Iasked.
‘Covering the hives was supposed to keep the bees fromleav- ing.You see, thelast thing theywanted was their bees swarming offwhen a death took place. Having
beesaround was supposed to ensurethat the dead personwould liveagain.’
My eyes grewwide.
‘Really?’
‘Tell herabout Aristaeus,’ Zach said.
‘Oh, yes, Aristaeus. Every beekeeper should knowthatstory.’
Shesmiled atmein a way thatmade mefeelI wasabout to get Part Two ofthe beekeeper’s induction, Part One being thesting.
‘Aristaeus was thefirst keeper of bees. One day all his bees died, punishment by the gods for something bad thatAristaeus had done. The gods told himto sacrifice
a bull to show he was sorry, and then return to the carcass in nine days and look inside it. Well, Aristaeus did just what they said, and when he came back, he saw a
swarmof bees fly out of the dead bull. His own bees, reborn. He took themhome to his hives, and after that people believed that bees had power over death. The
kings inGreece madetheir tombs in theshape of beehives for that very reason.’
Zach sat with hiselbows on his knees staring at thecircle of grass, stillfatand emerald green fromour dancein thesprinkler.
‘When a beeflies,asoulwillrise,’ hesaid. I gave hima blank look.
‘It’san old saying,’ Augustsaid.
‘Itmeansa person’s soulwill bereborn into the next lifeif beesarearound.’
‘Is that in the Bible?’ I said. August laughed.
‘No, but back when the Christians hid fromthe Romans down in thecatacombs, they used to scratch pictures of bees on the walls. To remind each other that when
they died they’d beresurrected.’
I shoved my hands under my thighsand sat up, trying to picturecatacombs, whatever theywere.
‘Do you think putting black cloths over the hives will help May get to heaven?’ Iasked.
‘Goodness no,’ Augustsaid.
‘Putting black cloths on the hives is for us. I do it to remind us that life gives way into death,and then death turnsaround and gives way into life.’
I leaned back inmy chair, gazing at the sky, how endless it was, the way it fit down over the world like the lid ofa hive. I wished more than anythingwe could bury
May in a beehivetomb. That Icould, myself, lie down in oneand bereborn. When the Daughters ofMary showed up, theywereloaded downwith food. Thelast time
I’d seen them, Queenie and her daughter, Violet, had on the smallest hats in the group, and this time they’d left themoffcompletely. I think it was because Queenie
hated to cover the whiteness of her hair, which she was proud to have, and Violet, who had to beforty at least, couldn’t bring herselfto weara hat if her mother wasn’t
wearing one. IfQueenie went into the kitchen and stuck her head in the oven, Violet would go stick hers in, too. Lunelle, Mabelee, Cressie, and Sugar-Girleachworea
black hat, not as spectacular as the previous ones, except for Lunelle’s, which had both a red veiland a red feather. They took off the hats and lined themup on the
piano as soon as they came in, so that you wanted to say, What’s the use? They got under way slicing ham, laying out fried chicken, shaking paprika on the deviled
eggs. We had green beans, turnips, macaroniand cheese, caramelcake—all kinds of funeral foods. We ate standing in the kitchen holding paper plates, saying how
muchMaywould haveliked everything. Whenwe wereso full that what we needed wasa nap, we went to the parlorand sat withMay. The Daughters passed around
a wooden bowlfull ofsomething they called manna.
A salted mixture of sunflower, sesame, pumpkin, and pomegranate seeds drizzled with honey and baked to perfection. They ate it by the handfuls, saying they
wouldn’t dreamofsittingwith the dead withouteating seeds. Seeds kept the living fromdespair, they explained. Mabelee said, ‘She looks so good—doesn’t she look
good?’
Queeniesnorted.
‘Ifshelooks that good, maybe we ought to put her on display in the drive-bywindowat thefuneral home.’
‘Oh, Queenie!’cried Mabelee. Cressie noticed Rosaleen and mesitting therein the dark and said, ‘Thefuneral homein town hasa drive-bywindow. It used to bea
bank.’
‘Nowadays they put the open casket right up in the windowwhere we used to drivethrough and get ourcheckscashed,’ said Queenie.
‘Peoplecan drivethrough and pay their respects without having to get out. They even send the guest book out in the drawer for you to sign.’
‘You ain’tserious,’ said Rosaleen.
‘Oh, yeah,’ Queeniesaid.
‘We’reserious.’
They might’ve been speaking the truth, but they didn’t look serious. They were falling on each other laughing, and there was May, dead. Lunelle said, ‘I drove in
there one time to see Mrs. Lamar after she passed, since I used to work for her way back when. The womanwho sat in the window beside her casket used to be the
bank teller there,and when I drove off, shesaid, ‘You havea nice day now.’
‘I turned to August, who was wiping hereyes fromtears of hilarity. I said, ‘Youwon’t let themput May in the bank window, will you?’
‘Honey, don’t worry about it,’ said Sugar-Girl.
‘The drive-bywindowisat the white people’s funeral home. They’rethe only ones with enoughmoney to fix up something that ridiculous.’
They all broke down again with hysterics, and I could not help laughing, too, partly with relief that people would not be joyriding through the funeral home to see
May and partly because you could not help laughing at the sight ofall the Daughters laughing. But I will tell you this secret thing, which not one of themsaw, not even
August, the thing that brought me the mostcause for gladness. It was how Sugar-Girlsaid what she did, like I was truly one ofthem. Not one person in the roomsaid,
Sugar-Girl, really, talking about white people like that and we have a white person present. They didn’t even think ofme being different. Up until then I’d thought that
white people and colored people getting along was the big aim, but after that I decided everybody being colorless together was a better plan. I thought of that policeman, Eddie Hazelwurst, saying I’d lowered myselfto be in this house ofcolored women, and for the very life ofme Icouldn’t understand how it had turned out this
way, how colored women had become the lowest ones on the totempole. You only had to look at themto see how special they were, like hidden royalty among us.
Eddie Hazelwurst. Whatashitbucket. I feltso warminsidetoward themI thought to myselfthat ifI should die, I would be glad to go on display in the bank windowand
give the Daughters of Mary a good laugh. On the second morning of the vigil, long before the Daughters arrived, even before June came downstairs, August found
May’s suicide note caught beneath the roots ofa live oak, not ten yards fromthe spot she’d died. The woods had buried it under fresh sprouted leaves, the kind that
shoot up overnight. Rosaleenwas making bananacreampiein honor ofMay, and I was sitting at thetable working onmy cerealand trying to find something decent on
the transistor radio whenAugust burst into the kitchen holding the note with two hands, like the words might fall off ifshe wasn’t realcareful. She yelled up the stairs,
‘June,come down here. I found a notefromMay.’
August spread it out on thetableand stood over it with her hands pressed together. I turned offthe plasticradio and stared at thecrinkle-stiff paper, howthe words
werefaded frombeing out- side. June’s barefeetslapped thestairs,and she brokeinto theroom.
‘Oh, God, August. What does itsay?’
‘It’s so…May,’ Augustsaid,and shelifted up the noteand read it to us.
Dear Augustand June,
I’msorry to leave you like this. I hate you being sad, but think how happy I’ll be withApril, Mama, Papa, and Big Mama. Picture us up there together, and that
will help some. I’mtired ofcarrying around the weight ofthe world. I’mjust going to lay it down now. It’s my time to die, and it’s your time to live. Don’t mess it
up.
Love, May
August laid the note down and turned to June. She opened herarms wide, and June walked into them. They clung to each other—big sister to little sister, bosomto
bosom, theirchins wrapped around each other’s necks. They stayed that way long enough for meto wonder—should Rosaleen and I leavetheroom?—but finally they
unwound themselves,and weallsat with thesmell of bananacreampie. Junesaid, ‘Do you think it was really her timeto die?’
‘I don’t know,’ said August.
‘Maybeit was. But onethingMaywas rightabout is that it’s our timeto live. It’s her dyingwish that we do that, June, so we need to seeto it. Allright?’
‘What do you mean?’said June. We watched August walk over to the window, put her hands on the countertop, and gaze out at the sky. It was aquamarine and
shiny as taffeta. You had thefeeling she was making a big decision. June pulled outachair, sat down.
‘August, what?’ WhenAugust turned back, her jawwas set.
‘I’mgoing to say something to you, June.’
She walked overand stood in front of her.
‘You’ve been halfway living your lifefor too long. Maywas saying that when it’s timeto die, go ahead and die, and when it’s time to live, live. Don’t sort-of-maybe
live, but livelike you’re going all out, like you’re notafraid.’
‘I don’t knowwhat you’retalking about,’ Junesaid.
‘I’msayingmarryNeil.’
‘What?’
‘Ever since MelvinEdwards backed out of your wedding allthose years back, you’ve been afraid oflove, refusing to takeachance. Like May said, it’s your timeto
live. Don’tmess it up.’
June’s mouth sat open in a wide circle, and not a word crossed her lips. Suddenly the air was coated with the smell of burning. Rosa- leen flung open the oven and
yanked out the pieto find every lastmeringuetip scorched.
‘We’lleat it likethat,’ said August.
‘Alittle burn taste never hurtanybody.’
Every day for four days straight we kept the vigil. August had May’s note with her at all times, tucked in her pocket or slipped under her belt ifshe had on a nopocket dress. I watched June, how she seemed quieter since August had lowered the boomon her about Neil. Not exactly sulking. Contemplating is more like it. I
would catch her sitting beside the coffin leaning her forehead against it, and you could tellshe was doingmore than saying good-bye to May. She was trying to find her
own answers to things. OneafternoonAugustand Zach and I went out to the hivesand took offthe black cloths.August said wecouldn’t leavethemon too long, since
the bees had memorized everything about their hive and a change like that could make themdisoriented. They might not find their way home again, she said. Tellme
about it, I thought. The Daughters of Mary showed up each day just before lunch and sat in the parlor with May through the afternoon, telling stories about her. We
cried a good bitalso, but Icould tellwe werestarting to feel betterabout saying good-bye. I only hoped Maywas feeling allrightabout it, too. Neilstayed at the house
nearly as much as the Daughters,and seemed downrightconfused by the way Junestared into his face. Shecould barely play thecello, becauseitmeant turning loose of
his hand. To tellthetruth, therest of us spent nearly as much time watching Juneand Neilas we did seeingMay into the next life. On theafternoon that thefuneral home
cameto pick up May for the burial, bees buzzed around thefront-windowscreens.As thecoffinwas loaded into the hearse, bee humswelled and blended into thelateafternoon colors. Yellow-gold. Red. Tinges of brown. I could still hear themhumming at the graveside, even though we were miles away in a colored cemetery with
crumbled markers and weeds. The sound carried on the breezes while we huddled together and watched them lower May’s coffin into the ground. August passed
around a paper bag full ofmanna, and wescooped up handfulsand threwtheseeds into the hole with thecoffin, and my ears werefilled with nothing but bee hum. That
night, inmy bed in the honey house, when Iclosed my eyes, bee humran throughmy body. Ran through the wholeearth. It was the oldest sound there was. Souls flying
away.
F
Chapter Eleven
It takes honeybee workers tenmillion foraging trips to gatherenough nectar to make one pound of honey. —Bees ofthe World
or May’s burialAugust shut down honey making, honey selling, even bee patrol. She and June took the meals that Rosaleen cooked to their rooms. I barely saw
August except in the mornings when she crossed the yard headed toward the woods. She would wave at me, and if I ran over and asked where she was going,
could I come, too, she would smile and say not today, that she was still doing her mourning. Sometimes she would stay out in the woods past lunch. I had to fight an
impulseto say, But I need to talk to you. Life was so funny. I’d spent overa month here dillydallying around, refusing to tellAugustabout mymother when Icould have
done it so easy, and now that I really needed to tell her, Icouldn’t. You just don’t interrupt somebody’s mourningwith your own problems. I helped Rosaleen some in
the kitchen, but mostly I was freeto liearound and writeinmy notebook. I wroteso many things frommy heart that I used up allthe pages. It surprised me no end how
much I missed our ordinary, routine life—the simple act of pouring wax into a candle mold or repairing a broken hive box. Kneeling betweenAugust and June for
evening prayers to Our Lady. I walked in the woods in the afternoon when I was sureAugust wasn’t out there. I would pick out a tree and say, Ifa bird lands in that
tree before I count to ten, that is my mother sending her sign of love. When I got to seven, I would start counting real slow, dragging it out. I would get to fifty
sometimes, and no bird. I studied mymap of SouthCarolina at night when everyone wasasleep, trying to figure where me and Rosaleenmight head next. I had always
wanted to see the rainbow-colored houses of Charleston, how they had real horse and buggies on the street, but as appealing as all that was, it nearly crushed me to
think ofleaving.And even ifanothercantaloupetruck miraculously appeared and drove us down there, Rosaleen and I would haveto get jobs somewhere, renta place
to stay, and hope nobody asked any questions. Sometimes I didn’t even feel like getting out of bed. I took to wearing my days-of-the-week panties out of order. It
could be Monday and I’d have on underwear saying Thursday. I just didn’tcare. The only timeI sawJune was whenNeilcame over, whichwasevery single day. She
would come out wearing hoop earrings, and offthey’d go, taking long rides in hiscar, which, shesaid, did hera world of good. The wind rearranged her thoughts, and
the countryside made her see all the life still left out there waiting to be lived. Neilwould get behind the wheel, and June would slide over on the front seat so she was
practically under the wheelwith him. Honestly, I worried for their safety. Zach showed up a few times just to visit and found me in the lawn chair withmy legs tucked
under me, reading back over my notebook. Sometimes when I sawhimmy stomachwent through aseries ofsudden dropsand lurches.
‘You are one-third friend, one-third brother, one-third bee partner, and one-third boyfriend,’ I told him. He explained to me I had one too many thirds in the
equation, which, ofcourse, I knew, as Iambad inmath but not that bad. Westared ateach otheras I tried to figure out which third would get deleted. I said, ‘IfI was
a Negro girl—‘ He placed his fingersacross my lips so I tasted his saltiness.
‘Wecan’t think ofchanging our skin,’ hesaid.
‘Changethe world—that’s howwe gottathink.’
All hecould talk about was going to lawschooland busting ass. He didn’t saywhiteass, and I was thankfulfor that, but I believethat’s what he meant. There wasa
placeinside himnowthat hadn’t been there before. Heated, charged, angry. Coming into his presence was likestepping up to a gas heater, to arowof bluefire burning
in the dark, wet curve of his eyes. His conversations were allabout the race riots in New Jersey, policemen taking their nightsticks to Negro boys who threw rocks,
about Molotov cocktails, sit-ins, righteous causes, MalcolmX, and theAfro-AmericanUnity group giving the KuKluxKlan a taste oftheir ownmedicine. I wanted to
say to Zach, Remember when we ate May’s Kool-Aid ice under the pine trees? Remember when you sang ‘Blueberry Hill’? Remember? After nonstop mourning all
week, just when I thought we would go on forever in our private, grievingworlds and neveragain eatanother meal together or work side by side in the honey house, I
found Rosaleen in the kitchen laying the table for four, using the Sunday-china plates with pink flowers and lacy scallops around the edge. I broke out with happiness
because life seemed headed back to normal. Rosaleen put a beeswax candle on the table, and I believe that was the first candlelit meal ofmy entire life. Here was the
menu:smothered chicken, rice and gravy, butter beans, sliced tomatoes, biscuits, and candlelight. We had barely started in when Rosaleen said to June, ‘So are you
gonna marryNeil or not?’
Augustand I both stopped chewing and sat up.
‘That’s for meto knowand you to find out,’ Juneanswered.
‘And howare wesupposed to find out, if youwon’t tell us?’ said Rosaleen. Whenwe’d finished thefood, August produced four bottles ofice-cold Coca-Colafrom
therefrigerator,alongwith four little packages ofsalted peanuts. We watched her pop thetops offthe Cokes.
‘What the heck is this?’ said June.
‘It’s Lily’sand my favorite dessert,’ August told her, smiling overatme.
‘Weliketo pour our peanuts straight into the bottle, but you can eat yours separately if you prefer.’
‘I think I prefer mineseparate,’ said June, rolling hereyes.
‘I wanted to makeacobbler,’ Rosaleen told June, ‘but Augustsaid it was gonna be Cokesand peanuts.’
Shesaid ‘Cokesand peanuts’ the way youmightsay ‘snotand boogers.’
August laughed.
‘They don’t knowa delicacywhen they see one, do they, Lily?’
‘No, ma’am,’I said, shaking the peanuts into my bottle, where they caused a little reaction offoam, then floated on the brown liquid. I drank and munched with the
glory of salt and sweet in my mouth at the same time, all the while looking toward the window, at birds flying home to their nests and moonlight just starting to pour
down on the midlands of South Carolina, this place where I was tucked away with three women whose faces shone with candle glow. When we had drained the
Cokes, we went to the parlor to say our HailMarys together for thefirst timesince May had died. I knelt on therug by June, while Rosaleen, as usual, helped herselfto
the rocker. August stood beside Our Lady and folded May’s suicide letter so it resembled a tiny paper airplane. She wedged it into a deep crevice that ran down the
side ofOur Lady’s neck. Then she patted black Mary’s shoulderand let outalong sigh thatmadetheairless roomfeelaliveagain. And said, ‘Well, that’s that.’
I’d been staying up inMay’s roomwith Rosaleen ever since May died, but when Rosaleen and I started to climb the stairs that night, on impulse I said, ‘You know
what?I think I’llmove back into the honey house.’
I found out I’d missed having aroomto myself. Rosaleen put her hands on her waist.
‘Good Lord,allthat fuss youmadeaboutme moving outand leaving you, nowhere you are wanting to leave me.’
Actually, she didn’tcare one bit that I wanted to move out;shejustcouldn’t pass up achanceto give mea hard time.
‘Come on, I’ll help you carry your stuff over there,’ shesaid.
‘Youmean, now?’
‘No timelikethe present,’shetold me. I guess she’d missed having aroomto herself, too.After Rosaleen left, I looked around my old roomin the honey house—it
was so quiet. All I could think was how this time tomorrow the truth would be out, how everything would change. I got mymother’s photograph and the black Mary
picture frommy bag, ready to showAugust. I slid themunder my pillow, but when I turned out the light, fear filled up my hard, narrow bed. It told me all the ways life
could go wrong. It had me in a girls’ prison camp in the Florida Everglades. Why the Everglades, I don’t know, except I’ve always thought that would be the worst
placeto bein prison. Think ofall thealligatorsand snakes, not to mention heat worsethanwe had here, and people had been known to fry not justeggs but bacon and
sausage on SouthCarolinasidewalks. Icould not imagine breathing in Florida. I would be down theresuffocating and never seeAugustagain. It was fearall night long.
I would’ve given anything to be back inMay’s room, listening to Rosaleen snore. The next morning I slept late, considering the on-and-off night I’d had, plus I’d been
falling into lazy habits without the honey house to keep me industrious. The smell offresh-baked cake wafted all the way fromthe pink house to my cot, curled into my
nostrils, and woke me up. When I got to the kitchen, there wereAugust, June, and Rosa- leen, dusted with flour, baking these small one-layer cakes the size of honey
buns. Theyweresingingwhiletheyworked, singing likethe Supremes, likethe Marvelettes, likethe Crystals wiggling their butts to ‘Da Doo RonRon.’
‘Whatare y’all doing?’ I said, grinning fromthe doorway. They stopped singing and giggled, giving each other litd shovesand nudges.
‘Well, look who’s up,’said Rosaleen. June had on lavender pedal pushers with daisy buttons up thesides, thelikes ofwhich I’d never seen before. Shesaid, ‘We’r
baking cakes for MaryDay. It’sabout time you got over hereand helped us. Didn’t August tell you this was MaryDay?’
I glanced at August.
‘No, ma’am, she didn’t.’
August, who was wearing one of May’s aprons, the one with ruffles trailing over the shoulders, wiped her hands across the front and said, ‘I guess I forgot to
mention it. We’ve been cele- brating Mary Day around here everyAugust for fifteen years. Come on and get your breakfast, and then you can help us. We’ve got so
much to do I don’t knowwhether we’re gonna makeit.’
I filled a bowlwithRice Krispiesand milk, trying to think over thesnap-crackleconversation it was havingwith itself. Howwas I supposed to havealife-altering talk
withAugust with allthis going on?‘Athousand yearsago womenwere doing thisexactsamething,’ said August.
‘Baking cakes for Mary on her feast day.’
Junelooked atmy blank face.
‘Today is the Feast ofthe As- sumption. August fifteenth. Don’t tellme you never heard that.’
Oh, sure, the Feast ofthe Assumption—Brother Gerald preached on thatevery other Sunday. OfcourseI’d never heard ofit. I shook my head.
‘We didn’t really allowMary at ourchurch exceptat Christmas.’
August smiled and dunked a wooden drizzleinto the vat of honey, which sat on thecounter by thetoaster oven. Whileshespun honey across thetops ofafresh pan
ofcakes, sheexplained to mein detail howtheAssumptionwas nothing less thanMary rising up to heaven. Mary died and woke up,and theangelscarried her up there
in swirling clouds.
‘May is the one who started calling it MaryDay,’ said June.
‘It’s not justabout the Assumption, though,’ Augustsaid, shoveling thecakes onto the wireracks.
‘It’s a special remembrance for our own Lady of Chains. We reenact her story. Plus we give thanks for the honey crop. The Daughters of Mary come. It’s our
favoritetwo days ofthe year.’
‘You do this for two days?’
‘Westart thisevening and finish tomorrowafternoon,’ said August.
‘Hurry up with your cereal, because you’ve got to make streamers and garlands, hang the Christmas lights, put out the candleholders, wash the wagon, and get out
thechains.’
I was thinking, Whoa, back up. Wash the wagon? Hang Christmas lights? Get out the chains? The chains? The knock on the back door came as I was puttingmy
bowlin thesink.
‘Ifthis isn’t the best-smelling houseinTiburon, I’ll bea monkey’s uncle,’ said Neil, stepping inside.
‘Well, I guess you’re saved fromthat special relationship then,’June said. She offered hima honey cake, but he shook his head, which was a dead giveaway right
therethat he had something on his mind. Neil did not refusefood. Ever. Hestood in the middle ofthefloor, shuffling fromonefoot to the other.
‘Whatare you doing here?’ Juneasked. Hecleared his throat, rubbed his sideburns.
‘I—Icame over here hoping fora word with you.’
This sounded so stiffcoming out of his mouth thatJune narrowed hereyesand studied himasecond.
‘Are you allright?’
‘I’mfine.’
He put his hands in his pockets. Took themout.
‘I just wanta word with you.’
Shestood there waiting.
‘Well, I’mlistening,’ shesaid.
‘I thought wecould takea drive.’
Shelooked around the kitchen.
‘If you haven’t noticed, I’mup to my ears inwork, Neil.’
‘Ican seethat, but—’
‘Look, just tellme what it is,’ Junesaid, starting to get into one of her huffs.
‘What is so all-fired important?’ I glanced atAugust, who had her lips screwed over to the side, trying to look busy. Rosaleen, on the other hand, had stopped all
semblance ofwork and looked fromJuneto Neil. Back to June.
‘Hell,’ hesaid, ‘Icame over here planning to ask you, for the hundredth time, to marryme.’
I dropped my spoon in the sink. August laid down the honey drizzle. June opened her mouth and closed it without anything coming out. Everyone just stood there.
Come on. Don’t mess up your time to live. The house creaked, like old houses do. Neil glanced at the door. I felt my shirt dampen all under my arms. I had the
sensation I used to get in fifth grade when the teacher would write some nonsense word on the blackboard, like ‘pnteahel,’and we had two minutes to unscramble it
and find the word ‘elephant’ before she dinged her bell. I used to break out in a sweat trying to beat the clock. I had that feeling now, like Neilwas going to walk out
the door beforeJunecould unscrambletheanswer in her heart. Rosaleen said, ‘Well, don’t juststand there with your mouth open, June. Say something.’
June stared at Neil, and I could see the struggle in her face. The surrender she had to make inside. Not just to Neil but to life. Finally she let out a long, sighing
breath.
‘Allright,’ shesaid.
‘Let’s getmarried.’
Rosaleen slapped her thigh and burst out with a whoop, while August broke into the biggest smile I believe I’d ever seen on her face. Me, I just looked fromone
person to another, trying to take it in. Neilwalked overand kissed June right on the mouth. I didn’t think theywere ever going to come up forair. When they did, Neil
said, ‘We’re going to thejewelry storethis minuteand pick outaring before you change your mind.’
Junecastalook back at August.
‘Well, I hateto leavethemwith allthis work,’ shesaid, but Icould tellshe didn’tmind a bit.
‘Go on,’August said. When they’d left,August, Rosaleen, and I sat down and ate honey cake whileit was still hot, talking over what had just happened. We had all
these chores facing us, but some things you have to sit and mull over before you can go on. We said, ‘Did you see the look on Neil’s face?’…’Can you believe that
kiss?’
Mostlywejust stared ateach other, saying ‘June’s gettingmarried!’Getting ready for MaryDaywas nonstop work. FirstAugust got mestarted on thestreamers. I
cut packages of thick blue-and white crepe paper into strips till I had rubbed blisters on both thumbs. I formed little twists in the edges withmy fingers to give thema
curled effect, then dragged the stepladder into the yard and hung themfromthe myrtle trees. I clear-cut the gladiolus bed and made a six-foot garland by wiring the
blossoms to a piece ofstring, which I thought I never would get right. When Iasked August what I was supposed to do with it, shesaid, ‘Drapeitaround the wagon.’ Well, ofcourse. Why didn’t I think of that? Next I rummaged around in the hallcloset for the Christmas lights, which she had me wind around the bushes by the
back porch steps, not to mention all the extension cords I had to rig. As I worked, Zach pushed the lawn mower, shirtless. I set up the card tables beside the myrtle
trees so thestreamers would drift overand tickle our faces while weate. I tried not to look at him, his tight skin sparklingwith sweat, his dogtag hanging fromthechain
around his neck, his shorts slung low on his hips, the little tuft of hair starting under his navel. He hoed up a big infestation ofcabbage weeds, withouteven being asked
to. Heswung the hoe with a blaze ofangry grunts, whileI sat on thestepsand dug candle wax out oftwo dozen glass holders. I refilled themwith fresh candlesand set
themallaround on the grass, under the trees, mostly in the little holes ofearth where the cabbage weeds had grown. Up on the back porchAugust cranked the ice
creamchurn. Beside her feetsatacoil ofchains. I stared at it.
‘What’s that for?’
‘You’ll see,’ she said. At 6:00 PM I was exhausted fromMary Day goings-on, and the real part hadn’t even started. I got the last thing on my list done and was
headed to the honey houseto get dressed, when Juneand Neil pulled into the driveway. June waltzed up with her hand stuck out so Icould admire her ring. I looked it
over,and I haveto sayNeil had outdone himself. It wasn’t that big, really, it was justso pretty. The diamond was tucked insideascalloped silver setting.
‘That’s the most beautifulring I’veever seen,’ I said. She kept her hand stretched out, turning it this way and that, letting the diamond catch thelight.
‘I think May would have loved it, too,’ she said. The first carload of the Daughters drove up then, and June sauntered toward themwith her hand outstretched.
Inside the honey house I lifted up my pillow to be sure mymother’s photograph and her black Mary picture were still underneath like I’d left them. Feast Day or not,
tonight had to be the night I got the truth fromAugust. The thought set offa nervous quiver throughme. I sat down on the cot and felt things building inside—pushing
against my chest. Heading back to the pink house, wearing clean shorts and a top, my hair allcombed, I stopped to behold everything. August, June, Rosaleen, Zach,
Neil, Otis, and all the Daughters of Mary stood around on the mowed grass beside the card tables, their laughter low and vibrating. Piles of food. Blue-and-white
streamers rippling in the breezes. The Christmas lights glowed in spirals ofcoloraround the porch, and all the candles were lit, even though the sunwas stillworking its
way down. Every molecule ofair gave off red fire. I said to myself, I love this place with my whole heart. The Daughters fussed over me—how good I smelled, how
exceptionalmy hair was when it wascombed. Lunellesaid, ‘Would you like meto make you a hat, Lily?’
‘Really? You’d make mea hat?’ WhereI would weara Lunelle-created hat wasa mystery, but I wanted oneallthesame. At theleast, Icould get buried in it one day.
‘OfcourseI’llmake you a hat. I’llmake you a hat youwon’t believe. Whatcolor would you like?’
August, who was listening in, said, ‘Blue,’and winked at me. First we ate. By now I’d learned eatingwas a high prioritywith the Daughters. Whenwe finished, the
redness had seeped fromthe day and night was arranging herself around us. Cooling things down, staining and dyeing the evening purple and blue black. Rosaleen
brought out the platter of honey cakes and set themon one of the tables. August motioned us to stand around the table in a circle. The Mary Day programwas under
way.
‘Theseare Mary’s honey cakes. Cakes for the Queen ofHeaven,’August said. Shetook one ofthemin her hand and, pinching offa piece, held it before Mabelee,
who stood next to her in thecircle. Augustsaid, ‘This is the body ofthe Blessed Mother.’
Mabeleeclosed hereyesand opened her mouth, andAugust laid thecake on her tongue.After Mabelee had swallowed, she did thesamethingAugust had done—
snipped offa pieceand gaveit to the next person in thecircle, who happened to be Neil. Mabdee, who could not have measured fivefeet tall in spike heels, practically
needed astepladder to get up to his mouth. Neilcrouched down and opened wide.
‘This is the body of the Mother,’ Mabelee said, and popped it in. I did not know one thing, really, about the Catholic Church, but somehow I felt sure the pope
would have keeled over if he’d seen this. Not Brother Gerald, though. He wouldn’t have wasted timefainting, just gotten busy arranging the exorcism. Me, I had never
seen grown-ups feed each other, and I watched with thefeeling I might burst outcrying. I don’t knowwhat got to meabout it, but for somereason thatcircle offeeding
made mefeel betterabout the world.As life would haveit, the one who fed meturned out to beJune. Openingmymouth, closingmy eyes, and waiting for the body of
the Mother, I heard June’s whisper brushmy ear—‘I’msorry for being hard on youwhen you first got here’—and then thesweetness of honey cakespread throughmy
mouth. I wished itcould have been Zach standing next to meso Icould lay thecake on his tongue. I would havesaid, I hopethis softens you toward the world. I hope
it brings you atender feeling. Instead I got to givethe pinch ofcaketo Cressie, who ateit with hereyesclosed.After we wereallfed, Zach and Neilwent to the parlor
and re- turned carryingOur Lady ofChains. Otis followed after them, lugging the pile ofchain. They stood her upright in thered wagon. August leaned over to me.
‘We’re going to reenact thestory ofOur Lady ofChains. We’retaking her over to the honey houseand chaining her in therefor the night.’
I thought, Our Lady is spending the night in the honey house. With me. As August pulled the wagon slowly across the yard, Zach and Neil braced Our Lady with
their hands. IfI do say so, theflower garland around the wagon set the wholething off. Junecarried hercello, whilethe Daughters trailed the wagon singlefile, carrying
burning candles. They sang, ‘Mary, star ofthesea, Mary, brightestmoon, Mary,comb of honey.’
Rosaleen and I brought up the rear, toting candles, too, trying to humalong, since we didn’t know the words. I cupped one hand around the flame ofmy candle to
be sure it didn’t blow out. At the door of the honey house, Neiland Zach lifted the statue out of the wagon and carried her inside. Sugar-Girl nudged Otis with her
elbow,and hestepped up and helped themget her situated between theextractorand the baffletank.
‘Allright,’ Augustsaid.
‘Nowwe’llstart thelast part of our service. Why don’t you stand in asemicircleright herearound Our Lady.’
June played us a gloomy-sounding song on the cello while August retold black Mary’s story start to finish. When she got to the part about the slaves touching Our
Lady’s heartand howshefilled themwith fearlessnessand plans ofescape, Juneturned up the volume.
‘Our Lady became so powerful,’saidAugust, ‘that the master was forced to put her under house arrest, to chain her in the carriage house. She wascast down and
bound up.’
‘The blessed, blessed Mother,’mumbled Violet. Neiland Otis took the chains and started wrapping themaround Our Lady. The wayOtis tossed the chain around
in thecandlelight, I was sureit would bea miracleif he didn’t killsomebody. August went on.
‘Buteach timethe masterchained Mary in thecarriage house, she would break thechainsand return to her people.’
August paused. She went around the circle and looked at us one by one, letting her eyes settle on each face like she wasn’t in any kind of rush. Then she lifted her
voice.
‘What is bound will be unbound. What iscast downwill belifted up. This is the promise ofOur Lady.’
‘Amen,’ said Otis. June began to play again, this time a more joyful tune, thank goodness. I gazed at Mary, wrapped head to toe in rusted chain. Outside, heat
lightning pulsed across thesky. They allseemed to besunk in their meditating, or whatever it was theywere doing. Everyone’seyes wereclosed,except Zach’s.
Hestared rightatme. I glanced at poor, shackled Mary. Icouldn’t bear seeing her likethat.
‘It is only areenactment,’ August had said.
‘To help us remember. Remembering iseverything.’
Still, the wholeidea wrapped mein sadness. I hated remembering. I turned and walked out ofthe honey house, into the warmhush of night. Zach caught up withme
as I reached the tomato garden. He took my hand, and we kept walking, stepping over May’s wall, walking into the woods without speaking. The cicadas were going
crazy, filling theair with their strange brand ofsinging. TwiceI walked into aspider’s web, feeling thefine, transparent threadsacross my face, and I liked themthere.A
veilspun fromthe night. I wanted the river. Its wildness. I wanted to strip naked and let the water lick my skin. Suck river stones the way I’d done that night Rosaleen
and I’d slept by the creek. Even May’s death had not ruined the river for me. The river had done its best, I was sure, to give her a peaceful ride out of this life. You
could diein ariver, but maybe you could get reborn in it, too, likethe beehivetombsAugust had told meabout. Beneath thetrees, moonlight trailed down. I steered us
toward the water. Watercan be so shiny in the dark. We stood on the bank and watched the moving pockets oflight, letting the water sounds swell up around us. We
werestill holding hands,and I felt his fingers tighten around mine.
‘There wasa pond near whereI used to live,’ I said.
‘Sometimes I would go thereto wadein the water. One day the boys fromthe next farmweretherefishing. They had alltheselittlefish they’d caught fastened onto a
stringer. They held me down on the bank and hooked itaround my neck, making it too small to pull over my head. I was shouting, ‘Let me up, get that offme,’ but they
laughed and said, ‘What’s the matter, don’t you like your fish necklace?’
‘’
‘Goddamn boys,’ Zach said.
‘Afewofthefishwerealready dead, but most ofthemflapped around with theireyes staring at me, looking scared. I realized ifI swamout into the water up to my
neck, they could breathe. I gotas faras my knees, but then I turned back. I was too afraid to go any further. I think that was the worst part. Icould’ve helped them, but
I didn’t.’
‘You couldn’t havestayed out therein the pond forever,’ Zach said.
‘But Icould’vestayed along time.AllI did was beg themto undo thestringer. Begged. They said to shut up, I was their fish holder, so I sat theretillall thefish died
againstmy chest. I dreamed about themfora year. Sometimes I would be hooked on thechain alongwith them.’
‘I knowthat feeling,’ hesaid. I looked as far into hiseyesas Icould see.
‘Getting arrested—‘ I didn’t knowhowto put it.
‘Whatabout it?’ hesaid.
‘Itchanged you, didn’t it?’
Hestared at the water.
‘Sometimes, Lily, I’mso angry I wanna killsomething.’
‘Those boys who made me wear thefish—theywereangry likethat, too.Angry at the world, and it madethemmean.You haveto promise me, Zach, youwon’t be
likethem.’
‘I don’t want to,’ hesaid.
‘Meeither.’
He bent his facecloseto mineand kissed me.At first it was like mothwings brushingmy lips, then his mouth opening onmine. I gave way against him. He kissed me
gently, butat thesametime hungrily, and I liked howhetasted, thescent of his skin, the way his lips opened and closed, opened and closed. I was floating on ariver of
light. Escorted by fish. Jeweled with fish. And even with so much beautifulaching inside my body, with life throbbing beneath my skin and the rushing ways of love
taking over,evenwith all ofthat, Icould feelthefish dying againstmy heart. When the kiss was over, helooked atme with burning in his face.
‘Nobodywill believe howhard I’mgonnastudy this year. That jailcell is gonna make meearn grades higher than Iever got.And when this year is over, nothing can
keep mefromleaving hereand going to college.’
‘I knowyou’ll do it,’ I said.
‘Youwill.’
And it wasn’t just words. I’mgood at sizing up people, and I knewforafact he would make himselfinto alawyer. Changes werecoming, even to SouthCarolina—
you could practically smell themin theair—and Zachwould help bring them. He would be one ofthose drummajors for freedomthat Martin Luther King talked about.
That’s howI liked to think ofZach now.Adrummajor. Hefaced me, and shifting around on his feet, hesaid, ‘I want you to knowthat I—‘ Hestopped and looked up
into thetreetops. I stepped nearer to him.
‘Youwantmeto knowwhat?’
‘That I—Icareabout you. I think about you allthetime.’
Itcrossed mymind to say there werethings he didn’t knowabout me, that he might notcareso much if he knewthem, but I smiled and said, ‘Icareabout you, too.’
‘Wecan’t betogether now, Lily, but one day,after I’ve goneaway and becomesomebody, I’mgonnafind you,and we’ll betogether then.’
‘You promise?’
‘I promise.’
Helifted thechainwith his dogtag fromaround his neck and lowered it over my head.
‘So youwon’t forget, okay?’
The silver rectangle dropped down under my shirt, where it dangled cold and certain between my breasts. Zachary Lincoln Taylor, resting there, along my heart. Wading in up to my neck.
I
Chapter Twelve
If the queen were smarter, she would probably be hopelessly neurotic. As is, she is shy and skittish, possibly because she never leaves the hive, but spends her
days confined in darkness, a kind ofeternal night, perpetually in labor…Her true role is less that ofa queen thanmother of the hive, a title often accorded to her.
And yet, this is something ofa mockery because of her lack ofmaternalinstincts or theability to carefor her young. —The QueenMust Die:And Other Affairs ofBeesand Men
waited forAugust in her room. Waitingwasa thing I’d had lots ofexperience doing. Waiting for the girlsat school to invite me somewhere. For T. Ray to change his
ways. For the policeto showup and drag us offto the Everglades prison. For mymother to send asign oflove. Zach and I had hung around outsidetillthe Daughters
ofMary finished in the honey house. We’d helped themclean up the mess in the yard, mestacking platesand cupsand Zach folding up card tables. Queenie had smiled
and said, ‘Howcome you two left before wefinished?’
‘It got too long,’ said Zach.
‘So that’s what it was,’she teased, and Cressie giggled. When Zach left, I slipped back into the honey house and retrieved mymother’s photograph and her black
Mary picture from underneath my pillow. Clutching them in my hands, I glided past the Daughters as they finished up the dishes in the kitchen. They called to me,
‘Where’re you going, Lily?’
I hated to be rude, but I found I couldn’t answer, couldn’t speak a word of idle talk. I wanted to know about my mother. I didn’t care about anything else. I
marched straight intoAugust’s room, aroomfilled with thesmell of beeswax. I switched on alamp and sat on thecedarchestat theend of her bed, whereI folded and
unfolded my hands eight or ten times. They were cool, damp, with a mind of their own. All they wanted to do was fidget and pop knuckles. I stuck themunder my
thighs. The only other time I’d been inAugust’s roomwas the time I’d fainted during the Daughters of Mary meeting and wakened in her bed. I must have been too
muddled then to see it, because it allseemed new to me. You could’ve wandered around in this roomfor hours and had a field day looking at her stuff. For starters,
everything was blue. Bedspread, curtains, rug, chair cushion, lamps. Don’t get the idea it was boring, though. She had ten different shades of it. Sky blue, lake blue,
sailor blue, aqua blue—you namea blue. I had thefeeling ofscuba diving through the ocean. On her dressing table, whereless interesting people would’re putajewelry
box ora pictureframe,August had afish aquariumturned upside downwith a giant piece of honeycomb insideit. Honey had oozed outand formed puddles on thetray
underneath. On her bedside tables were beeswax candles, melted down into brass holders. I wondered if they could be the ones I’d personally created. It gave me a
little thrill to think so, how I had helped to light August’s room when it was dark. I walked over and inspected the books arranged neatly on her bookshelf. The
Advanced Language of Beekeeping, Apiary Science, Bee Pollination, Bulfinch’sAge of Fable, The Myths ofGreece, The Cultivation ofHoney, Bee LegendsAround
the World, Mary Through the Ages. I pulled the last one off the shelfand opened it across my lap, thumbing through the pictures. Sometimes Mary was brunette and
brown-eyed, other times blond and blue-eyed, but gorgeous every time. She looked like a MissAmerica contestant. AMiss Mississippi. You can usually count on the
girls fromMississippi to win. Icouldn’t help wishing to see Mary in a swimsuitand heels—before her pregnancy, ofcourse. The big shock, though, wasall the pictures
ofMary being presented with alily by theangelGabriel. In every one, where heshowed up to tell her she was going to havethe baby of babies,even though she wasn’t
married yet, he had a big white lily for her. As if this was the consolation prize for the gossip she was in for. I closed the book and put it back on the shelf. Abreeze
moved through theroomfromthe openwindow. I walked to itand stared outat the dark fringe oftrees by theedge ofthe woods, a halfmoonwedged likea gold coin
into a slot, about to drop through the sky with a clink. Voices filtered through the screen. Women voices. They rose in chirps and melted away. The Daughters were
leaving. I twisted my hair withmy fingers, walked around thethrowrug in circles, the way a dogwill do beforeit settles onto thefloor. I thoughtabout prisonmovies in
which they’re about to electrocute some prisoner—wrongly convicted, ofcourse—the camera going back and forth between the poor man sweating in his cell block
and theclock creeping toward twelve. I sat down on thecedarchestagain. Footsteps landed on thefloorboards in the hallway, precise, unhurried steps.August steps. I
sat up straighter, taller, my heartstarting to beatso Icould hear it inmy ears. When shestepped into theroom, shesaid, ‘I thought I might find you here.’
I had a desireto bolt past her through the door, dive out the window. You don’t haveto do this, I told myself, but the wanting rose up. I had to know.
‘Remember when…’ I said. My voicecame out barely a whisper. Icleared my throat.
‘Remember when you said weshould haveatalk?’
Sheclosed the door. Asound so final. No turning back, itsaid. This is it, itsaid.
‘I remember it verywell.’
I laid out the photograph ofmymother on thecedarchest. August walked overand picked up the picture.
‘You arethespitting image of her.’
Sheturned hereyes onme, her big, flickering eyes with thecopper fireinsidethem. I wished Icould look outat the world through themjust onetime.
‘It’s mymother,’ I said.
‘I know, honey. Your mother was Deborah FontanelOwens.’
I looked at her and blinked. She stepped toward me, and the yellow lamplight glazed her glasses so I could no longer make out her eyes. I shifted my position so I
could seethembetter. She dragged thechair fromher dressing table over to thecedarchestand sat down facingme.
‘I’mso glad we’refinally going to talk this out.’
Icould feel her knee barely touchingmine.Afullminute passed withouteither of us saying a word. She held the picture, and I knewshe was waiting for meto break
thesilence.
‘You knew she was my mother allalong,’ I said, uncertain whether I felt anger, or betrayal, or just plain surprise. She placed her hand on mine and brushed her
thumb back and forth across my skin.
‘The first day you showed up, I took one look at you and all I could see was Deborah when she was your age. I knew Deborah had a daughter, but I thought no,
you couldn’t be; it was too much to believe that Deborah’s daughter would turn up inmy parlor. Then you said your name was Lily, and right that minute I knew who
youwere.’
Probably I should haveexpected this. I felt tears gather in the back ofmy throat,and I didn’teven knowwhy.
‘But—but—you never said a word. Howcome you didn’t tellme?’
‘Because you weren’t ready to know about her. I didn’t want to risk you running away again. I wanted you to have a chance to get yourself on solid ground, get
your heart bolstered up first.
There’safullness oftimefor things, Lily.You haveto knowwhen to prod and when to be quiet, when to let things taketheircourse. That’s what I’ve been trying to
do.’
It grewso quiet. Howcould I be mad at her?I had donethesamething. Held back what I knew,and my reasons were not theleast bit noblelike hers.
‘May told me,’ I said.
‘May told youwhat?’
‘I sawher making atrail of grahamcrackersand marshmallows for theroaches to follow. My father told me oncethatmymother used to do thesamething. I figured
she’d learned it fromMay. So Iasked her, ‘Did you ever knowa Deborah Fontanel?’
‘and shesaid yes she did, that Deborah had stayed in the honey house.’
Augustshook her head.
‘Goodness, there’s so much to tell. You remember how I told you I worked as a housekeeper back in Richmond, before I got my teaching job? Well, that was in
your mother’s house.’
Mymother’s house. Itseemed odd to think of her with aroof over her head. Apersonwho lay on a bed,atefood atatable, took baths in atub.
‘You knewher when she was little?’
‘I used to takecare of her,’ Augustsaid.
‘I ironed her dressesand packed her schoollunch in a paper bag. Sheloved peanut butter. That’sallshe wanted. Peanut butter Monday through Friday.’
I let outmy breath, realizing I’d been holding it.
‘Whatelse did shelove?’
‘Sheloved her dolls. She would hold littletea parties for themin the garden,and I would maketheseteeny-tiny sandwiches for their plates.’
She paused, likeshe was remembering.
‘What she didn’t like was schoolwork. I had to stay after her all the time about it. Chase her around calling out spelling words. One time she climbed a tree, hiding
up thereso she wouldn’t haveto memorizea poembyRobert Frost. I found herand climbed up there with the book and wouldn’t let hercome down tillshecould say
the wholething by heart.’
Closingmy eyes, I sawmymother perched besideAugust on a tree limb going through each line of‘Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,’which I myself had
had to learn for English. I letmy head drop,closed my eyes.
‘Lily, before wetalk anymoreabout your mother, I want you to tellme howyou cameto be here. Allright?’
I opened my eyesand nodded.
‘You said your father was dead.’
I glanced down at her hand still onmine,afraid she mightmoveit.
‘I madethat up,’ I said.
‘He’s not really dead.’
Hejust deserves to be dead.
‘Terrence Ray,’ shesaid.
‘You knowmy father, too?’
‘No, I never met him, only heard about himfromDeborah.’
‘Icall himT. Ray.’
‘Not Daddy?’
‘He’s not the Daddy type.’
‘What do youmean?’
‘He yellsallthetime.’
‘At you?’
‘Ateverything in the world. But that’s not thereason I left.’
‘Thenwhat was it, Lily?’
‘T. Ray…hetold me mymother…’ Thetears rushed up,and mywordscame out in high-pitched sounds I didn’t recognize.
‘Hesaid sheleftme, thatsheleft both of usand ran away.’
Awall of glass brokeinmy chest, a wallI didn’teven knowwas there.August slid up to theedge of herchairand opened herarms, the way she’d opened themto
June that day they’d found May’s suicide letter. I leaned into them, felt themclose around me. One thing is beautiful beyond my words to say it:August holding you. I
was pressed so close to her I felt her heart like a small throbbing pressure against my chest. Her hands rubbed my back. She didn’t say, Come on now, stop your
crying, everything’s going to be okay, which is the automatic thing people say when they want you to shut up. She said, ‘It hurts, I know it does. Let it out. Just let it
OUT-T.’
So I did. Withmymouth pressed against her dress, it seemed like I drew up my whole lifeload of pain and hurled it into her breast, heaved it with the force ofmy
mouth, and she didn’t flinch. She was wet with my crying. Up around her collar the cotton of her dress was plastered to her skin. I could see her darkness shining
through the wet places. She was likeasponge, absorbingwhat Icouldn’t hold anymore. Her hands felt warmonmy back, and every timeI paused to sniffand gasp for
a little air, I heard her breathing. Steady and even. In and out. As my crying wound down, I let myself be rocked in her breathing. Finally I pulled back and looked at
her, dazed by theforce ofwhat had erupted. Sheran her fingeralong theslope ofmy noseand smiled asad kind ofsmile.
‘I’msorry,’ I said.
‘Don’t be sorry,’she said. She went to her dresser and pulled a white handkerchief fromthe top drawer. It was folded, ironed, with ‘A. B.’monogrammed on the
front in silvery threads. She dabbed softly atmy face.
‘I want you to know,’ I said, ‘I didn’t believe T. Ray when he told me that. I know she never would’ve left me like that. I wanted to find out about her and prove
howwrong he was.’
I watched her move her hand up under her glassesand pinch the place between hereyes.
‘And that’s whatmade you leave?’ I nodded.
‘Plus, Rosaleen and I got in trouble downtown,and I knewifI didn’t leave, T. Raywas gonna half killme,and I was tired of being half killed.’
‘Whatsort oftrouble?’
I wished I didn’t haveto go on. I looked at thefloor.
‘Are you talking about howRosaleen got the bruisesand thecut on her head?’
‘Allshe wanted to do was register her nameto vote.’
Augustsquinted likeshe was trying to understand.
‘Allright, now, you startat the beginning. Okay?Just take your timeand tellme what happened.’
The best Icould, I told her the miserable details, careful not to leave anything out:Rosaleen practicingwriting her name, the three men taunting her, how she poured
snuffjuice on their shoes.
‘Apoliceman took us to jail,’ I said,and I heard howstrangethe words sounded to my ears. Icould only imagine howthey sounded to August.
‘Jail?’ shesaid. Her bones seemed to soften alittlein her body.
‘They put you in jail? What was thecharge?’
‘The policeman said Rosaleen assaulted the men, but I was there,and she was only protecting herself. That’sall.’
August’s jawtightened,and her back went ramrod straight.
‘Howlongwere you in there?’
‘Me, I didn’tstay long. T. Ray cameand gotme out, but theywouldn’t let Rosaleen go,and then those men came back and beat her up.’
‘Mother ofGod,’saidAugust. The words hovered over us. I thought ofMary’s spirit, hidden everywhere. Her heartared cup offierceness tucked among ordinary
things. Isn’t that what Au- gust had said? Here,everywhere, but hidden.
‘Well, howdid shefinally get out?’
Somethings you haveto takea deep breath and justsay.
‘I went to the hospitalwherethey’d taken her to getstitches,and I—I sneaked her past the policeman.’
‘Mother ofGod,’ shesaid for thesecond time. Shestood up and walked oneloop around theroom.
‘I never would have done it, except T. Ray said the man who beat Rosaleen was the meanest hater ofcolored people anywhere, and it would be just like himto
come back and kill her. Icouldn’t leave her in there.’
It was scary, my secrets spilled outacross theroom, likea garbagetruck had backed up and dumped its sorry contentsacross the floor for her to sort through. But
that wasn’t what frightened me most. It was the wayAugust leaned back in her chair and looked off toward the window with her gaze skimming the top ofmy head,
looking at nothing but thesticky air, her thoughtsa nerve-rackingmystery. Afever brokealongmy neck.
‘I don’tmean to bea bad person,’ I said,and stared atmy hands, howtheywerefolded together like hands in prayer.
‘Ican’tseemto help it.’
Youwould think I was totally cried out, but tears beaded again alongmy lids.
‘I do all the wrong things. I tell lies, all the time. Not to you. Well, I have—but for good reasons. And I hate people. Not just T. Ray but lots of people. The girlsat
school, and they haven’t doneanything to meexcept ignore me. I hate Willifred Marchant, the poet of Tiburon, and I don’teven knowher. Sometimes I hate Rosaleen
becausesheembarrasses me. And when I firstcame here, I hated June.’
Aflood ofsilence now. It roselike water; I heard aroar inmy head, rain inmy ears. Look atme. Put your hand back onmine. Say something. By nowmy nose was
running alongwithmy eyes. I was sniffling, wipingmy cheeks, unableto stop mymouth fromspewing outevery horriblething Icould drumup about myself, and onceI
was finished…well, ifshecould love methen, ifshecould say, Lily, you arestillaspecialflower planted on theearth, thenmaybeI would beableto look in the mirrors
in her parlorand seetheriver glistening inmy eyes, flowing on despitethethings that had died in it.
‘Butall ofthat, that’s nothing,’I said. I was onmy feet needing to go someplace, but there was no placeto go. We were on an island.Afloating blueisland in a pink
house whereI spilled out my gutsand then hoped I wasn’t tossed out to seato wait for my punishment.August was looking at me, waiting. I didn’t knowifIcould say
it.
‘It was my faultshe died. I—I killed her.’
I sobbed and dropped straight down onto my knees on the rug. It was the first time I’d ever said the words to another person, and the sound of thembroke open
my heart. Probably one or two moments in your wholelife youwill heara dark whispering spirit,a voicecoming fromthecenter ofthings. It will have blades for lipsand
will not stop until it speaks the one secret thing at the heart of it all. Kneeling on the floor, unable to stop shuddering, I heard it plainly. It said, You are unlovable, Lily
Owens. Unlovable. Who could love you? Who in this world could ever love you? I sank farther down, onto my heels, hardly aware ofmyselfmumbling the words out
loud.
‘Iamunlovable.’ When I looked up, I saw dust particles floating in the lamplight, August standing, looking down at me. I thought she might try to pullme to my feet, but instead she
knelt beside meand brushed the hair back frommy face.
‘Oh, Lily,’ shesaid.
‘Ch.’
‘Iaccidentally killed her,’ I said, staring straight into hereyes.
‘Listen to me now,’ said August, tiltingmy chin to her face.
‘That’saterrible, terriblething for you to live with. But you’re not unlovable. Even if you did accidentally kill her, you arestillthe most dear, most lovable girlI know. Why, Rosaleen loves you. May loved you. It doesn’t take a wizard to see Zach loves you. And every one of the Daughters loves you. And June, despite her ways,
loves you, too. It just took hera whilelonger becausesheresented your mother so much.’
‘Sheresented mymother? But why?’ I said, realizing thatJune must have knownwho I wasallalong, too.
‘Oh, it’scomplicated, just likeJune. Shecouldn’t get over me working asa maid in your mother’s house.’
August gave her head ashake.
‘I knowit wasn’t fair, butshetook it out onDeborah,and then on you. Buteven Junecamearound to loving you, didn’tshe?’
‘I guess,’ I said.
‘Mostly, though, I want you to know, I love you. Just likeI loved your mother.’
Auguststood up, but I stayed whereI was, holding her words inside me.
‘Give me your hand,’shesaid, reaching down. Getting to my feet, I felt dizzy around theedges, that feeling like you’vestood up too fast.All this lovecoming to me.
I didn’t knowwhat to do with it. I wanted to say, I love you, too. I love you all. Thefeeling rose up inmelikeacolumn ofwind, but when it got to mymouth, it had no
voice, no words. Justalot ofairand longing.
‘We both need alittle breather,’August said, and she plodded toward the kitchen.August poured us glasses ofice water fromtherefrigerator. Wetook themto the
back porch, where we sat in the porch swing, taking little gulps ofcoolnessand listening to the chainscreak. It’s surprising howsoothing that sound can be. We hadn’t
bothered to turn on the overhead light, and that was soothing, too—just sitting in the dark. Aftera fewminutesAugust said, ‘Here’s what Ican’t figure out, Lily—how
you knewto come here.’
I pulled the wooden picture of black Mary frommy pocketand handed it to her.
‘It belonged to mymother,’ I said.
‘I found it in theattic, thesametimeI found her photograph.’
‘Oh, myLord,’ shesaid, her hand going up to theside of her mouth.
‘I gavethis to your mother not long beforeshe died.’
Sheset her water glass on thefloorand walked across the porch. I didn’t knowwhether to keep talking, so I waited for her to say something,and when she didn’t, I
went and stood beside her. She had her lips tight together and her eyes scanning the night. The picture was clutched in her hand, but her hand dangled by her side. It
took afullminutefor her to pullit up so wecould both stareat it.
‘It has ‘Tiburon, S. C.’ written on the back ofit,’ I said. August turned it over.
‘Deborahmust have written that.’
Something closeto asmile passed over her face.
‘That would’ve been just like her. She had an albumfull of pictures, and she’d write on the back ofevery single one ofthemthe placeit was taken, even ifit was her
own house.’
She handed methe picture. I stared at it, lettingmy finger moveacross the word ‘Tiburon.’
‘Who would’ve thought?’August said. We went and sat in the swing, where we rocked back and forth, making little pushes on the floor with our feet. She stared
straightahead. Her slip strap had fallen down to herelbow, and she didn’teven notice. Junealways said that most people bit offmorethan they could chew, butAugust
chewed morethan she bit off. Juneloved to teaseAugustabout the way she pondered things, howone minuteshe was talking to you and the nextshe had slipped into a
private world where she turned her thoughts over and over, digesting stuffmost people would choke on. I wanted to say, Teachme how to do that. Teachme how to
takeallthis in.
Thunder rumbled over the trees. I thought ofmymother’s tea parties, tiny sandwiches for a doll’s mouth, and it washed me in sadness. Maybe because I would’ve
loved so much to haveattended something likethat. Maybe becauseallthesandwiches would’ve been peanut butter, mymother’s favorite, and I wasn’teven thatcrazy
about it. I wondered at the poemAugust had made her learn, whether it had stuck with her after she got married. Had she lain in her bed listening to T. Ray snore,
reciting it whileshefellasleep, wishing to God shecould run awaywithRobert Frost?I gaveasideways glanceatAugust. I forced mymind back to that moment in her
bedroomwhen I’d confessed the worst of human things. Upon hearing it, she’d said, I love you. Just likeI loved your mother.
‘Allright then,’ said August, like we’d never stopped talking.
‘The pictureexplains howyou cameto Tiburon, but howin the world did you find me?’
‘That waseasy,’ I said.
‘We hadn’t been here any time before I spotted your Black Madonna Honey, and there was the same picture on it as my mother had. The Black Madonna of
Breznichar ofBohemia.’
‘You said that real nice,’ August told me.
‘I’ve been practicing.’
‘Where did you seethe honey?’
‘I was in that Frogmore StewGeneralStore out on theedge oftown. Iasked this man in a bowtie where he got it. He’s the one who told me where you lived.’
‘That would be Mr. Grady.’
Sheshook her head.
‘I swear, itmakes methink youwere meant to find us.’
I was meant to, I didn’t havea doubtabout it. I just wish I knewwhereI was meant to end up. I looked down at our laps, howboth of us had our hands laying palm
side up on top of our thighs, like we were bothwaiting for something to drop in.
‘So why don’t wetalk some moreabout your mother?’ shesaid. I nodded. Every boneinmy bodywascrackingwith the need to talk about her.
‘Anytime you need to stop and takeanother break, you just tellme.’
‘Allright,’I said. What wascoming, Icouldn’t imagine. Something that required breaks. Breaks for what? So Icould dance for joy? So she could revive me after I
fainted dead away? Or was the idea of breaks so I could let the bad news sink all the way in? Adog started barking way off in the distance. August waited for it to
stop, then said, ‘I started working for Deborah’s mother in 1931. Deborahwas four years old. The cutestchild, butalways into something. I mean, a real handful. For
one thing, she used to walk in her sleep. One night she walked outside and climbed a ladder the roofers had left leaning against the house. Her sleepwalking nearly
drove her mothercrazy.’
Shelaughed.
‘And your mother had an imaginary friend. You ever had one?’
I shook my head.
‘She called hers Tica Tee. She would talk to her out loud like she was standing right there in front of us, and if I forgot to set a place for Tica Tee at the table,
Deborahwould throwafit. Oncein a while, though, I’d seta placeand she’d say, ‘Whatare you doing? Tica Tee’s not here. She’s offstar- ring in the movies.’
Your mother loved ShirleyTemple.’
‘Tica Tee,’ I said, wanting to feelthat onmy tongue.
‘That Tica Tee was something,’ Augustsaid.
‘Whatever Deborah struggled with, Tica Tee could do it perfectly. Tica Tee made hundreds on her school papers, got gold stars in Sunday school, made her bed,
cleaned her plate. People told your grand mother—Sarah was her name—that she ought to take Deborah to this doctor in Richmond who specialized in children with
problems. But I told her, ‘Don’t worry about it. She’s just working things out in her ownway. She’ll growout ofTica Teein time.’
And she did.’ Where had I been that I didn’t know about imaginary friends? I could see the point of it. How a lost part of yourselfsteps out and reminds you who you could be
with alittle work.
‘It doesn’tsound like meand mymother wereanything alike,’ I said.
‘Oh, but youwere. She had astreak in her like you do. Suddenly she would up and do something other girls wouldn’t dreamof.’
‘Like what?’
Auguststared over my shoulderand smiled.
‘One time she ran away fromhome. I can’t even remember what she was upset about. We looked for her long past dark. Found her curled up in a drainage ditch,
sound asleep.’
The dog had started barking again, and August grew quiet. We listened like it was some kind of serenade, while I sat with my eyes closed, trying to picture my
motherasleep in a ditch. Aftera whileI said, ‘Howlong did youwork for—my grandmother?’
‘Agood long time. Over nine years. UntilI got that teaching job I told you about. Westill kept up after I left, though.’
‘I bet they hated it when youmoved down hereto SouthCarolina.’
‘Poor Deborah cried and cried. She was nineteen by then, butshecried likeshe was six.’
Theswing had slowed to astop,and neither one of us thought to rev it back up.
‘Howdid mymother get down here?’
‘I’d been heretwo years,’ Augustsaid.
‘Had started my honey business and June was teaching school, when I gota long-distance phone callfromher. She was crying her eyes out, saying her mother had
died.
‘I don’t haveanybody left but you,’ she keptsaying.’
‘Whatabout her father? Where was he?’
‘Oh, Mr. Fontanel died when she wasa baby. I neverevenmet him.’
‘So she moved down hereto be with you?’
‘Deborah had afriend fromhigh schoolwho’d just moved to Sylvan. She was the one who convinced Deborah it wasa good placeto be. Told her there werejobs
and men back fromthe war. So Deborahmoved. I think it wasalot because ofme, though. I think she wanted me nearby.’
The dots wereallstarting to connect.
‘Mymothercameto Sylvan,’ I said, ‘met T. Ray,and gotmarried.’
‘That’s right,’August said. Whenwe’d firstcome out onto the porch, thesky had been clotted with stars, the Milky Way shining likean actualroad you could walk
down and find your mother standing at the end ofwith her hands on her hips. But nowa damp fog rolled into the yard and settled over the porch. Aminute latera light
rain fell out ofit. I said, ‘The part I will never figure out is why she married him.’
‘I don’t think your father was always like he is now. Deborah told me about him. She loved the fact he was decorated in the war. He was so brave, she thought.
Said hetreated her likea princess.’
Icould havelaughed in her face.
‘This isn’t thesame Terrence Ray, Ican tell you that right now.’
‘You know, Lily, people can start out one way, and by the time life gets throughwith themthey end up completely different. I don’t doubt he started offloving your
mother. In fact, I think he worshiped her.And your mother soaked it up. Likealot of youngwomen, shecould getcarried awaywith romance. Butafter sixmonths or
so it started wearing off. One of her letters talked about Terrence Ray having dirt under his fingernails, I remember that. Next thing I knewshe was writingme howshe
didn’t knowifshecould live way out on afarm, that kind ofthing. When he proposed, shesaid no.’
‘Butshe married him,’ I said, genuinely confused.
‘Later on shechanged her mind and said yes.’
‘Why?’ I said.
‘Ifthelove had worn off, why did she marry him?’
Augustcupped her hand on the back ofmy head and smoothed my hair with her fingers.
‘I’ve thought hard about whether I should tell you, but maybe it’ll help you understand everything that happened a lot better. Honey, Deborah was pregnant, that’s
why.’
Theinstant beforeshesaid it, I knewwhat wascoming, butstill her words felllikea hammer.
‘She was pregnant withme?’
My voicesounded tired saying the words. Mymother’s life was too heavy for me.
‘That’s right, pregnant with you. Sheand Terrence Ray gotmar- ried around Christmastime. Shecalled long distanceto tellme.’
Unwanted, I thought. I was an unwanted baby. Not only that, mymother had gotten stuck with T. Ray because ofme. I was glad it was dark, so August couldn’t
see my face, howbent in it was.You think youwant to knowsomething, and then once you do, all you can think about iserasing it fromyour mind. Fromnowonwhen
people asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up, I planned to say, Amnesiac. I listened to the hiss of rain. The spray floated over and misted my cheeks while I
counted onmy fingers.
‘I was born sevenmonthsafter they gotmarried.’
‘Shecalled merightafter youwere born. Shesaid youwereso pretty it hurt hereyes to look at you.’
Something about this caused my own eyes to sting like sand had flown into them. Maybe my mother had cooed over me after all. Made embarrassing baby talk.
Twirled my newborn hair like the top ofan ice creamcone. Done it up with pink bows. Just because she didn’t plan on having me didn’t mean she hadn’t loved me.
August went on talkingwhileI leaned back into thefamiliar story I’d always told myself, the oneabout mymother lovingme beyond reason. I’d lived insideit the way a
goldfish lives in its bowl, as ifthat was the onlyworld there was. Leaving it would bethe death ofme. I sat there withmy shoulders slumped, staring at thefloor. I would
not think the word ‘unwanted.’
‘Are you allright?’ Augustsaid.
‘Youwant to go to bed nowand sleep on allthis, talk about therest in the morning?’
‘No’ burst out ofmy lips. I took a breath.
‘I’mfine, really,’ I said, trying to sound unruffled.
‘I just need some more water.’
Shetook my empty glassand went to the kitchen, looking back twiceatme. When shereturned with the water, she had ared umbrella hooked over her wrist.
‘In a little while I’ll walk you over to the honey house,’ she said. As I drank, the glass shook in my hand and the water would hardly go down. The sound of
swallowing inmy throat grewso loud it blotted out therain for severalseconds.
‘Are you sure you don’t want to go to bed now?’ Augustasked.
‘I’msure. I need to know—’
‘You need to knowwhat, Lily?’
‘Everything,’ I said. Augustsettled herself beside me on theswing, resigned.
‘Allright then,’ shesaid.
‘Allright.’
‘I knowshe onlymarried himbecause ofme, but do you think she was justalittle bit happy?’ Iasked.
‘I think fora while she was. She tried, I know that. I gota dozen or so letters and at least that many phone calls fromher, spread out over the firstcouple of years,
and I could see she was making an effort. Mostly she wrote about you, how you were sitting up, taking your first steps, playing patty-cake. But then her letters came
less and less often, and when they did come, I could tell she was unhappy. One day she called me up. It was the end ofAugust or first of September—I remember
because we’d had MaryDay not long beforethat.
‘Shesaid she was leavingT. Ray, thatshe had to leave home. She wanted to knowifshecould staywith us hereforafewmonths tillshefigured out whereto go. Of
course, I said, that would befine. When I picked her up at the bus station, she didn’teven look like herself. She had gotten so thin and had these dark circles under her
eyes.’
My stomach did aslowroll. I knewwe’d cometo the placein thestory I feared the most. I began to breathe very fast.
‘I was with her when you picked her up at the bus station. She broughtmealong, didn’tshe?’
August leaned overand whispered againstmy hair.
‘No, honey, shecame by herself.’
I realized I’d bitten theskin inside my cheek. Thetaste of blood made me want to spit, but I swallowed it instead.
‘Why?’ I said.
‘Why didn’tshe bringme?’
‘All I know, Lily, is that she was depressed, kind of falling apart. The day she left home, nothing unusual happened. She just woke up and decided she couldn’t be
there anymore. She called a lady from the next farm to baby-sit, and she drove Terrence Ray’s truck to the bus station. Up until she got here, I thought she’d be
bringing youwith her.’
Theswing groaned while wesat theresmellingwarmrain, wet wood, rotted grass. Mymother had leftme.
‘I hate her,’ I said. I meant to shout it, but itcame out unnaturally calm, lowand raspy likethesound ofcarscrunching slowly over gravel.
‘Now, hold on, Lily.’
‘I do, I hate her. She wasn’tanything likeI thoughtshe was.’
I’d spentmy lifeimagining allthe ways she’d loved me, whata perfectspecimen ofa mother she was. And all ofit was lies. I had completelymade her up.
‘It was easy for her to leave me, because she never wanted me in the first place,’ I said. August reached for me, but I got to my feet and pushed open the screen
door leading to the porch steps. I let itslambehind me, then sat on therain-sopped steps, hunched up under theeave. I heardAugustmoveacross the porch, felt theair
thicken as shestood behind me on the other side ofthescreen.
‘I’mnot ing to makeexcuses for her, Lily,’ shesaid.
‘Your mother did whatshe did.’
‘Some mother,’ I said. I felt hard inside. Hard and angry.
‘Will you listen to me for a minute? When your mother got here to Tiburon, she was practically skin and bone. May couldn’t get her to eat a thing. Allshe did was
cry for a week. Later on we called it a nervous breakdown, but while it was happening we didn’t know what to call it. I took her to the doctor here, and he gave her
somecod liver oiland asked where her whitefamilywas. Hesaid maybeshe needed to spend sometime onBullStreet. So I didn’t take her back to himagain.’
‘BullStreet. The mentalinstitution?’
Thestorywas gettingworse by the minute.
‘But that’s forcrazy people,’ I said.
‘I guess he didn’t knowwhatelseto do for her, butshe wasn’tcrazy. She was depressed, but notcrazy.’
‘You should’velet himput her in there. I wish she’d rotted in there.’
‘Lily!’ I’d shocked her,and I was glad. Mymother had been looking for love,and instead she’d found T. Ray and thefarm,and thenme,and I had not been enough
for her. She’d left me with T. RayOwens. Theskywas split by azigzagged path oflightning, buteven then I didn’t move. My hair blewlikesmokein every direction. I
feltmy eyes harden, growflatand narrowas pennies. I stared ata dollop of bird shit on the bottomstep, the way therainwas smearing it into thecrevices ofthe wood.
‘Are you listening now?’ Augustsaid. Her voicesifted through thescreen, little barbed-wiretips on everyword.
‘Are you?’
‘I hear you.’
‘Depressed people do things theywouldn’t ordinarily do.’
‘Like what?’ I said.
‘Abandon theirchildren?’
I couldn’t stop. The rain spattered my sandals, dripped betweenmy toes. Letting outa loud breath, August walked back to the swing and sat down. It seemed like
maybeI’d hurt her, disappointed her, and something about that punched a holeinme. Some ofmy pridefulness drained out. Ieased offthestepsand went back inside,
onto thescreened porch. As I sat down beside her on theswing, shelaid her hand onmine,and the heat flowed out fromher palminto my skin. I shuddered.
‘Come here,’she said, pulling me over to her. It was like being swept under a bird’s wing, and that’s how we stayed for a while, rocking back and forth with me
tucked under there.
‘Whatmade her so depressed likethat?’ I said.
‘I don’t knowthe wholeanswer, but part ofit was her being out on thefarm, isolated fromthings, married to a man shereally didn’t want to be married to.’
The rain picked up, coming down in large, silver-black sheets. I tried, but I couldn’t make heads or tails ofmy heart. One minute I hated mymother, the next I felt
sorry for her.
‘Okay, she was having a nervous breakdown, but howcould sheleave me behind likethat?’ I said.
‘After she’d been herethree monthsand was feeling alittle better, shestarted talking about howmuch she missed you. Fi nally she went back to Sylvan to get you.’
I sat up and looked at August, hearing the quick suck ofair throughmy lips.
‘Shecame back to getme?’
‘She planned to bring you here to Tiburon to live. She even talked to Clayton about filing divorce papers. The last time I saw her, she was on a bus waving at me
through the window.’
I leaned my head onAugust’s shoulderand knewexactlywhat had happened next. Iclosed my eyes, and thereit was. Thelong-gone day that would never leave—
the suitcase on the floor, how she’d tossed clothes into it without folding them. Hurry, she’d kept saying. T. Ray had told me she came back for her things. But she’d
come back for me, too. She’d wanted to bring me here, to Tiburon, to August’s. If only we’d made it. I remembered the sound of T. Ray’s boots on the stairs. I
wanted to pound my fists against something, to screamat my mother for getting caught, for not packing faster, for not coming sooner. At last I looked up at August. When I spoke, mymouth tasted bitter.
‘I remember it. I remember hercoming back for me.’
‘I wondered about that,’ shesaid.
‘T. Ray found her packing. Theywere yelling and fighting. She—‘ I stopped, hearing their voices inmy head.
‘Go on,’ Augustsaid. I looked down atmy hands. Theyweretrembling.
‘She grabbed a gun frominside the closet, but he took itaway fromher. It happened so fast it gets mixed up inmy brain. I saw the gun on the floor, and I picked it
up. I don’t knowwhy I did that. I—I wanted to help. To giveit back to her. Why did I do that? Why did I pick it up?’
Augustslid out to theedge oftheswing and turned to face me. Hereyes were determined-looking.
‘Do you remember what happened next,after you picked it up?’
I shook my head.
‘Only the noise. Theexplosion. So loud.’
Thechains on theswing twitched. I looked overand sawAugust frowning.
‘Howdid you find outabout—mymother dying?’ I said.
‘WhenDeborah didn’tcome back likeshesaid…well, I had to knowwhat happened, so Icalled your house. Awoman answered, said she wasa neighbor.’
‘Aneighbor of ours told you?’ Iasked.
‘Shesaid Deborah had been killed in an accident with a gun. That’sallshe would say.’
I turned and looked outat the night,at dripping treelimbs,atshadows moving on the half-lit porch.
‘You didn’t knowthat I was the one who—who did it?’
‘No, I never imagined such athing,’ shesaid.
‘I’mnotsureIcan imagineit now.’
Shelaced her fingers together, then laid themin her lap.
‘I tried to find out more. I called back again, and Terrence Ray answered, but he wouldn’t talk about it. He kept wanting to know who I was. I even called the
policestation in Sylvan, but theywouldn’t give outany information either, justsaid it wasan accidental death. So I’ve had to live with not knowing. Allthese years.’ Wesat in thestillness. Therain had nearly stopped, leaving us with allthis quietand askywith no moon.
‘Come on,’ Augustsaid.
‘Let’s get you in bed.’ We walked into the night, into the blurring song of katydids, the thud-splat of raindrops on the umbrella, all those terrible rhythms that take up inside when you let
your guard down. Left you, they drummed. Left you. Left you. Knowing can be a curse on a person’s life. I’d traded in a pack of lies for a pack of truth, and I didn’t
know which one was heav- ier. Which one took the most strength to carry around? It was a ridiculous question, though, because once you know the truth, you can’t
ever go back and pick up your suitcase oflies. Heavier or not, the truth is yours now. In the honey house, August waited tillIcrawled under the sheets, then bent over
and kissed my forehead.
‘Every person on theface oftheearthmakes mistakes, Lily. Every last one. We’reallso human. Your mother madeaterrible mistake, butshetried to fix it.’
‘Good night,’ I said,and rolled onto my side.
‘Thereis nothing perfect,’ Augustsaid fromthe doorway.
‘Thereis only life.’
S
Chapter Thirteen
Aworker [bee] is just overacentimeter long and weighs only aboutsixtymilligrams; nevertheless, shecan flywith aload heavier than herself. —The HoneyBee
weatcollected in thecreases ofmy elbows, in thesoft places behind my knees. Lying on top ofthesheets, I touched my eyelids. I’d cried so much theywere puffed
outand halfshut. Ifit hadn’t been for my eyelids, I might not have believed any ofthe things that had passed betweenme andAugust. I hadn’t moved sinceAugust
left, only lay there staring at the flat surface ofthe wall, at the array of night bugs that wander outand crawlaround for fun after they think you’re asleep. When I grew
tired of watching them, I placed my armacross my eyes and told myself, Sleep, Lily. Please, just go to sleep. But ofcourse, I couldn’t. I sat up, feeling like my body
weighed two hundred pounds. Like somebody had backed the cement truck up to the honey house, swung the pipe over to my chest, and started pouring. I hated
feeling likeaconcrete block in the middle ofthe night. Morethan once, whilestaring at the wall, I’d thought ofOur Lady. I wanted to talk to her, to say, Where do I go
fromhere? But when I’d seen her earlier, whenAugust and I had first come in, she didn’t look like she could be of service to anybody, bound up with all that chain
around her. You want the one you’re praying to at least to look capable. I dragged myself out of bed and went to see her anyway. I decided that even Mary did not
need to be one hundred percent capable all the time. The only thing I wanted was for her to understand. Somebody to let out a big sigh and say, You poor thing, I
knowhowyou feel? Given achoice, I preferred someoneto understand my situation, even though she was helpless to fix it, rather than the other way around. But that’s
just me. Right off I smelled the chain, its thick, rusty odor. I had the urge to unwrap her, but ofcourse that would have ruined the whole reenactment August and the
Daughters had going. The red candle flickered at Mary’s feet. I plopped onto the floor and sat cross-legged in front of her. Outside, I heard wind high in the trees, a
singsong voicethatcarried me back to long ago times when I would wakein the night to thesamesound and, muddled with sleep and wanting, would imagineit was my
mother out there among the trees, singing her bottomless love. Once I flew into T. Ray’s room, yelling she was outside my window. He said three words: ‘Holy crap,
Lily.’
I hated when he was right. There had never been any voice in the wind. No mother out there singing. No bottomless love. The terrible thing, the really terrible thing,
was theanger inme. It had started on the back porchwhen thestory ofmymother had collapsed, likethe ground under my feet givingway. I didn’t want to beangry. I
told myself, You’re not angry. You don’t have any right to be angry. What you did to your mother is a lot worse thanwhat she did to you. But you can’t talk yourself
out ofanger. Either you areangry or you’re not. Theroomwas hotand still. In another minuteI would not beableto breathefor theanger fillingme up. My lungs went
out only so far before they struck against it and closed back in. I got to my feet and paced in the darkness. Behind me on the worktable a half dozen jars of Black
Madonna Honeywaited for Zach to deliver themsomewherein town—to Clayton’s maybe, to the Frogmore StewGeneralStore, the AmenDollar, or Divine Do’s, the
colored beauty parlor. Howdareshe? Howdaresheleave me?I was herchild.
I looked toward the window, wanting to smash the panes out ofit. I wanted to throwsomething all the way to heaven and knock God clean off his throne. I picked
up one ofthe honey jarsand hurled itas hard as Icould. It missed black Mary’s head by inchesand smashed against the back wall. I picked up another oneand threw
it, too. It crashed on the floor beside a stack of supers. I threw every last jar on the table, until honey was spattered everywhere, flung like cake batter fromelectric
beaters. I stood in a gooey roomfull of broken glass, and I didn’tcare. Mymother had left me. Who cared about honey on the walls?I grabbed atin bucket nextand,
letting outa grunt, threwit with so much forceit lefta dent in the wall. My throwing armwas nearlyworn out, but I picked up atray ofcandle moldsand flung that, too.
Then I stood still, watching the honey slide along the wall toward the floor. Atrickle of bright blood wound downmy leftarm. I had no idea how it’d gotten there. My
heart beat wildly. I felt likeI’d unzipped my skin and momentarily stepped out ofit, leaving acrazy person in charge. Theroomturned likeacarousel, withmy stomach
gliding up and down. I felta need to touch the wallwith both hands to makeit stillagain. I walked back toward thetable wherethe honey jars had been and braced my
hands against it. Icouldn’t think what to d. I felta powerfulsadness, not because ofwhat I’d done, as bad as that was, but because everything seemed emptied out—
the feelings I’d had for her, the things I’d believed, all those stories about her I’d lived off of like they were food and water and air. Because I was the girlshe’d left
behind. That’s what it came down to. Looking around at the wreck I’d made, I wondered ifsomeone in the pink house might have heard the honey jars hit the wall. I
went to the window and stared across the gloomin the yard. The panes inAugust’s bedroomwindow were dark. I felt my heart inmy chest. It hurt so badly. Like it
had been stepped on.
‘Howcome you left me?’I whispered, watchingmy breathmakeacircle offog on the glass. I stayed pressed against the windowfora while, thenwentand cleared
offafewpieces of glass fromthefloor in front ofOur Lady. I lay down onmy side, drawingmy knees toward my chin.Above me, black Marywas flecked with honey
and seemed notatallsurprised. I lay in theemptiness, in thetiredness, with every thing—even the hating—comdrained out. There was nothing left to d. No placeto go.
Just right here, right now, where the truth was. I told myself not to get up in the night and walk across the floor unless I wanted to cut my feet to smithereens. Then I
closed my eyes and began to piece together the dreamI wanted myself to h. How a little door in the black Mary statue would open up, just over her abdomen, and I
would crawl insideto a hidden room. This was notallmy imagination, as I had glimpsed an actual picture ofthis inAugust’s book—astatue ofMarywith a wide-open
door and, inside, all these people tucked away in the secret world of consolation. I woke to Rosaleen’s big hands shaking me and opened my eyes to a terrible
brightness. Her face was bent over mine, thescent ofcoffeeand grapejelly coming fromher mouth.
‘Lily!’ she yelled.
‘What in the SamHill happened in here?’
I’d forgotten there would be dried blood caked across my arm. I looked at it, ata piece of glass, smallasastub of diamond, burrowed in a puckered setting ofskin.
Around me, jagged pieces ofjars and puddles of honey. Blood dotted the floor. Rosaleen stared at me, waiting, bewildered-looking. I stared back, trying to make her
facecomeinto focus. Sunlightslanted across Our Lady and fell down around us.
‘Answer me,’ Rosaleen said. I squinted in thelight. Mymouth couldn’tseemto open up and speak.
‘Look at you. You’ve been bleeding.’
My head nodded, bobbed around onmy neck. I looked at the wrecked room. I feltembarrassed, ridiculous, stupid.
‘I—I threwsomejars of honey.’
‘Youmade this mess?’she said, like she couldn’t quite believe it, like what she’d expected me to saywas that a roving band of house wreckers had come through
during the night. She blewa puff ofair over her face, so forcefulit lifted her hair, whichwas noteasy to do considering theamount oflacquer she keptsmeared on it.
‘Lord God in heaven,’shesaid. I got to my feet, waiting for her to bawlme out, but shetook her thick fingersand struggled to pluck the piece of glass frommy arm.
‘You need some Mercurochrome on this before you get infected,’ shetold me.
‘Come on.’
Shesounded exasperated, likeshe wanted to take me by theshouldersand shake metillmy teeth fell out. I sat on theside ofthetub while Rosaleen dabbed my arm
with astinging icy swab. She plastered a Band-Aid across itand said, ‘There, youwon’t diefromblood poisoning at least.’
She closed the medicine cabinet over the sink, then shut the bathroomdoor. I watched her take a seat on the commode, how her belly dropped down between her
legs. When Rosaleen sat on a toilet, the whole thing disappeared under her. I perched on the side of the tub and thought how glad I wasAugust and June were still in
their rooms.
‘Allright,’ shesaid, ‘why did you throwallthat honey?’
I looked at therowofseashells on the windowledge, knowing howtruly they belonged hereeven thoughwe werea hundred miles fromthe ocean.August had said
everybody needed a seashell in her bathroomto remind her the ocean was her home. Seashells, she’d said, are Our Lady’s favorite items, next to the moon. I went
overand picked up one oftheshells,a prettywhite one, flat with yellowaround theedges. Rosaleen sat there watchingme.
‘Any time now,’ shesaid.
‘T. Raywas rightaboutmymother,’ I said, hearingmyselfsay the words, feeling sickened by them.
‘Sheleftme. It was just like hesaid it was. Sheleftme.’
For a second the anger I’d felt the night before flared up, and it crossed mymind to slamthe shellagainst the tub, but I took a breath instead. Throwing fits wasn’t
thatsatisfying, I’d found out. Rosaleen shifted her weight,and thetoilet lid squeaked and slid around on top oftheseat. Sheraked her fingers over thetop of her head. I
looked away,at the pipe under thesink,atasmudge ofrust on thelinoleum.
‘So your mother did leaveafterall,’ shesaid.
‘Lord, I wasafraid ofthat.’
I lifted my head. I remembered that first night after we ran away, down by the creek, when I’d told Rosaleen what T. Ray had said. I’d wanted her to laugh at the
very idea ofmymother leavingme, butshe’d hesitated.
‘You knewalready, didn’t you?’ I said.
‘I didn’t knowfor sure,’ shesaid.
‘I just heard things.’
‘What things?’
Shelet outasigh, really somethingmorethan asigh.
‘After your mama died,’shesaid, ‘I heard T. Ray on the phonetalking to that neighbor lady, Mrs. Watson. He was telling her he didn’t need her to watch after you,
that he’d gotten one ofthe pickers out ofthe orchard. He was talking aboutme, so I listened.’
Outside the window a crow flew past, filling the bathroomwith a frantic caw-caw, and Rosaleen stopped, waiting for it to die down. I knew Mrs. Watson from
church, fromall the times she stopped to buy peaches fromme. She was kind as she could be, but she’d always looked at me like there was something indescribably
sad written across my forehead, likeshe wanted to come overand scrub it off. Iclutched theside ofthetub as Rosaleenwent on, notsureI wanted her to.
‘I heard your daddy tellMrs. Watson, ‘Janie, you’ve done morethan your share, looking after Lily these past months. I don’t knowwhat we would’ve done without
you.’
‘Rosaleen looked atmeand shook her head.
‘Ialways wondered what he meant by that. When you told me what T. Ray said about your mother leaving you, I guess I knewthen.’
‘Ican’t believe you didn’t tellme,’ I said and folded my armsacross my chest.
‘So howdid you find out?’ Rosaleen asked.
‘August told me,’ I said. I thought ofall that crying I’d done in her bedroom. Holding fistfuls of her dress inmy hand. The monogramon her handkerchief, scratchy
againstmy cheek.
‘August?’ Rosaleen repeated. You don’tsee Rosaleen looking dumbfounded that often, but that’s thelook she had now.
‘She knewmymother back when she wasalittle girlinVir- ginia,’ Iexplained.
‘August helped raise her.’
I waited afewseconds, letting itsoak in.
‘This is where mymothercame when sheleft. When…Mrs. Watson took care ofme,’ I said.
‘Shecameright hereto this house.’
Rosaleen’seyes greweven narrower, ifsuch athingwas possible.
‘Your mother—‘ she said, then stopped. I could see that her brain was struggling to fit it all together. My mother leaving. Mrs. Watson watching me. My mother
returning, only to get killed.
‘Mymother stayed herethree months beforeshe went back to Sylvan,’ I said.
‘I guess one day it finally dawned on her:Oh, yeah, that’s right, I’ve gotalittle girlat home. Gee, maybeI’ll go back and get her now.’
I heard the bitter toneinmy voice, and itcameto me howIcould lock that toneinto my voiceforever. Fromnowon, every timeI thought ofmymother, Icould, so
easy, slip offinto a cold place where meanness took over. I squeezed the shelland felt it dig into the pad ofskin onmy palm. Rosaleen got to her feet. I looked at her,
howlargeshe was in thelittle bathroom. I stood up, too,and forasecond we weresandwiched together between thetub and thetoilet, staring ateach other.
‘I wish you’d told me what you knewaboutmymother,’ I said.
‘Howcome you didn’t?’
‘Oh, Lily,’ shesaid,and there was gentleness in her words, likethey’d been rocked in alittle hammock oftenderness down in her throat.
‘Whywould I go and hurt youwith something likethat?’
Rosaleenwalked beside meto the honey house with a mop flung over her shoulderand aspatulain her hand. Icarried a bucket ofragsand the Spicand Span. We
used thespatulato scrape honey off places youwouldn’t believe. Some ofit had gotten allthe way over ontoAugust’saddingmachine. We wiped offthefloorsand the
walls, thenwent to work onOur Lady. We picked the place up and turned it back the way it was, and theentiretime we didn’t speak a word. I worked with heaviness
inside, withmy spirit emptied out. There was my breath curling in hard puffs frommy nostrils. There was Rosaleen’s heart so full toward me it broke through into her
sweating face. There was Our Lady talking with her eyes, saying things I could not make out. And there was nothing else. The Daughters and Otis arrived at noon,
lugging in all manner of potluck dishes, as if we hadn’t eaten ourselves sick the night before. They tucked theminto the oven to keep warmand stood around in the
kitchen sneaking bites of Rosaleen’s corn fritters, saying they were the finest fritters they’d ever had the pleasure ofeating, which caused Rosaleen to swell up with
pride.
‘Y’allstop eating up allRosaleen’s fritters,’ Junesaid.
‘They’refor our lunch.’
‘Oh, let ‘emeat,’said Rosaleen, which floored me, sinceshe’d been known to smack my hand sideways for pinching asinglecrumb off her fritters before dinner. By
thetime Neiland Zach arrived, thefritters were nearly gone, and Rosaleenwas in danger offloating offinto theatmosphere. I stood numb and plaster stiffin thecorner
of the kitchen. I wanted to crawl onmy knees back to the honey house and ball up in the bed. I wanted everybody to shut up and go home. Zach started toward me,
but I turned away and stared down thesink drain. Fromthecorner ofmy eyeI grewaware ofAugust watchingme. Her mouthwas brightand shiny, likeshe’d rubbed
on Vaseline, so I knew she’d been dipping into the fritters, too. She walked over and touched her hand to my cheek. I didn’t think August knew about me turning the
honey houseinto a disasterzone, butshe had a way offiguring things out. Maybeshe was lettingme knowit was okay.
‘I want you to tellZach,’ I said.
‘Aboutmerunning away,aboutmymother,abouteverything.’
‘Don’t youwant to tell himyourself?’
My eyes started to fill up.
‘Ican’t. Please, you do it.’
She glanced in his direction.
‘Allright then. I’lltell himthefirstchanceI get.’
She led the group outside for the last ofthe MaryDay ceremony. We paraded into the backyard, all the Daughters with tiny smudges of grease clinging to their lips.
June was out there waiting for us, sitting in an armless kitchen chair, playing her cello. We gathered around her while the lights of noontime bore down. The music she
played was the kind thatsawed through you,cutting into thesecretchambers of your heartand setting thesadness free. Listening to it, Icould see mymother sitting on a
Trailways bus, riding out of Sylvan, while my four-year-old self napped on the bed, not yet knowingwhat I would waketo. June’s musicturned into air, and theair into
aching. I swayed onmy feetand tried not to breathe it in. It wasa reliefwhenNeiland Zach stepped out ofthe honey house carryingOur Lady; it got mymind offthe
Trailways bus. They carried her under theirarms likeatube ofcarpet, with thechains slapping back and forth against her body.You’d think theywould usethe wagon
again, something a little more dignified than this. And ifthat wasn’t bad enough, when they set her down, they deposited her in the middle ofan anthill, which started an
ant stampede. We had to jump around, shaking themoff our feet. Sugar-Girl’s wig, which for somereason sheinsisted on calling a‘wig hat,’ had slid down toward her
eyebrows fromthejumping around, so we had to havetime out for her to go insideand adjust it. Otis yelled after her, ‘I told you not to wear that thing, it’s too hot fora
wig. It’s sliding around on your head fromthe perspiration.’
‘IfI wanna wear mywig hat, I’mgonna wear it,’ shesaid over her shoulder.
‘Don’t we know it,’ he snapped back, looking at us like we were all on his side, when really were backing Sugar-Girl one hundred percent. Not because we liked
her wig—it was the worst-looking thing you ever saw—we just didn’t like Otis giv- ing her orders. When all that finally settled down, August said, ‘Well, here we are,
and here’s Our Lady.’
I looked her over, proud of howclean she was. August read Mary’s words fromthe Bible:’
‘For behold fromhenceforth all generations shallcallme blessed—’
‘’
‘Blessed Mary,’ Violet interrupted.
‘Blessed, blessed Mary.’
Shestared at thesky,and wealllooked up, wondering ifshe’d caughta glimpse ofMary climbing through theclouds.
‘Blessed Mary,’ shesaid one moretime.
‘Todaywe’recelebrating the Assumption ofMary,’ Augustsaid.
‘We’re celebrating how she woke fromher sleep and rose into heaven. And we’re here to remember the story of Our Lady of Chains, to remind ourselves that
thosechainscould never keep her down. Our Lady brokefree ofthemevery time.’
August grabbed hold of the chain around black Mary and unwrapped a loop before handing it off to Sugar-Girl, who unwrapped it a little further. Every one of us
got to join in taking offaloop ofchain. What I remember is theclinking noiseit madeas it uncoiled in a pileat Mary’s feet, thesounds seeming to pick up where Violet
left off. Blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed.
‘Mary is rising,’ said August, her voiceconcentrated into a whisper.
‘Sheis rising to her heights.’
The Daughters lifted theirarms. EvenOtis had hisarms shotstraight up in theair.
‘Our Mother Marywill not becast down and bound up,’ said August.
‘And neither will her daughters. We willrise, Daughters. We…will…rise.’
June sliced her bow across the cello strings. I wanted to lift my arms with the rest ofthem, to heara voice coming to me out ofthe sky, saying, Youwillrise, to feel
that it was possible, but they hung limp by my sides. Inside, I felt smalland contemptible, abandoned. Every time I closed my eyes, I stillsaw the Trailways bus. The
Daughters stayed with their arms reaching into the air, giving off the feeling they were rising with Mary. ThenAugust picked up a jar of Black Madonna Honey from
behind June’s chair, and what she did with it brought everybody back to earth. She opened the lid and turned it upside down over Our Lady’s head. Honey oozed
downMary’s face, across her shoulders, sliding down thefolds of her dress.Awedge of honeycomb stuck in thecrook ofOur Lady’selbow. I looked at Rosaleen as
ifto say, Well, great, wespentallthat timecleaning honey off her,and herethey go putting it back on. I decided nothing these women did would ever surprise meagain,
but that lasted about onesecond, because next the Daugh- ters swarmed around Our Lady likeacircle of beeattendantsand rubbed the honey into the wood, working
it into thetop of her head, into hercheeks, her neck and shouldersand arms,across her breasts, her belly.
‘Come on, Lily, and help us,’ said Mabelee. Rosaleen had already dived in and was coating honey all over Our Lady’s thighs. I hung back, but Cressie took my
hands and dragged me over to Mary, slapped themdown in the muck ofsun-warmed honey, right on top ofOur Lady’s red heart. I remembered how I’d visited Our
Lady in the middle ofthe night, howI’d placed my hand on thatsamespot. You are mymother, I’d told her then. You arethe mother ofthousands.
‘I don’t get whywe’re doing this,’ I said.
‘Wealways bathe her in honey,’ said Cressie.
‘Every year.’
‘But howcome?’
August was working the honey into Our Lady’s face.
‘Thechurches used to bathetheir specialstatues in holywaterasa way to honor them,’ shesaid.
‘Especially statues ofOur Lady. Sometimes they bathed her inwine. Wesettled on honey.’
Augustmoved down to Our Lady’s neck.
‘See, Lily, honey is a preservative. It seals over the comb in the hives to keep it safe and pure so the bees can survive the winter. Whenwe bathe Our Lady in it, I
guess you’d saywe’re preserving her foranother year,at least inside our hearts we’re doing that.’
‘I didn’t knowhoneywasa preservative,’ I said, starting to likethefeel ofit under my fingers, howthey glided as if oiled.
‘Well, people don’t think about honey like that, but it’s so strong-acting people used to smear it on dead bodies to embalmthem. Mothers buried their dead babies
in it,and it would keep themfresh.’
This wasa use for honey I hadn’tconsidered. Icould just see funeral homes selling big jars of honey for dead people, instead ofcoffins. I tried to picture that in the
drive-throughwindowat thefuneral home. I began to work my hands into the wood,almostembarrassed at theintimacy ofwhat we were doing.
Once Mabelee leaned her head over too farand got honey all in her hair, but it was Lunelle who took the cake with honey dripping offthe ends of herelbows. She
kept trying to lick it off, but ofcourse her tongue couldn’t reach that far. The ants started a single-file parade up the side ofOur Lady, drawn by the honey, and not to
be outdone, a handful ofscout bees showed up and landed on Our Lady’s head. Let somebody bring out the honey and the insect kingdomwill be there in no time.
Queeniesaid, ‘Next I guess the honey bears will bejoining us.’
I actually laughed and, spotting a honey-free place near the base of the statue, worked to get it covered up. Our Lady was covered with hands, every shade of
brown and black, going in their own directions, but then thestrangest thing started happening. Gradually all our hands fell into the same movement, sliding up and down
the statue in long, slow strokes, then changing to a sideways motion, like a flock of birds that shifts direction in the sky at the same moment, and you’re left wondering
who gavethe order. This went on for I don’t knowhowlong,and we didn’t ruin it by talking. We were preservingOur Lady,and I wascontent—for thefirst timesince
I’d learned about my mother—to be doing what I was doing. Finally we all stepped back. Our Lady stood there with her chains spilled around her on the grass,
absolutely goldenwith honey. One by onethe Daughters dipped their hands into a bucket ofwaterand washed offthe honey. I waited tillthe very last, want ing to keep
the coating of honey onmy skin as long as Icould. It was like I was wearing a pair of gloves withmagic properties. Like Icould preserve whatever I touched. We left
Our Lady in the yard while weate, then returned and washed her withwater thesameslowwaywe’d washed her with honey.After Neiland Zach carried her back to
her placein the parlor,everyoneleft. August, June,and Rosaleen started doing the dishes, but I slipped offto the honey house. I lay down onmy cot, trying not to think.
Have you noticed the more you try not to think, the more elaborate your thinking episodes get? While trying not to think, I spent twenty minutes on this fascinating
question: if you could have one miracle fromthe Bible happen to you, what would it be? I eliminated the one about multiplying loaves and fishes, as I never wanted to
see food again. I thought walking onwater would be interesting, but what good was that? I mean, youwalk onwater, what’s the point? I settled on getting raised from
the dead, since a big part ofme still felt dead as a doornail. All this took place before I even realized I was thinking. I had just gone back to trying again not to think
whenAugust tapped on the door.
‘Lily,can Icomein?’
‘Sure,’I said, but I didn’t bother to get up. So much for not thinking. Try to befivesecondsaroundAugustand not think. She breezed in holding a gold-and-whitestriped hatbox. Shestood a moment looking down at me, seeming unusually tall. Thefan on thelittle wallshelfrotated around and blewhercollar, making it flap around
her neck. She has brought mea hat, I thought. Maybeshe had gone down to theAmenDollarand bought meastrawhat to cheer me up. But that didn’t makea bit of
sense, really. Why would a straw hat cheer me up? Then I thought for one second it might be the hat Lunelle had promised to make for me, but that didn’t fit either.
Lunelle wouldn’t have had timeto sewup a hat this soon. Augustsat onRosaleen’s old cotand placed the box on her lap.
‘I’ve brought you some of your mother’s belongings.’
I stared at the perfect roundness of the box. When I took a deep breath, it stuttered strangely as it came out. Mymother’s belongings. I didn’t move. I smelled the
aircoming through the window,churned up by thefan. Icould tellit had turned thick with afternoon rain, but theskywas holding back.
‘Don’t youwant to see?’ shesaid.
‘Just tellme what’s in it.’
She placed her hand on thelid and patted.
‘I’mnot sureIcan remember. I didn’teven remember the box till this morning. I thought we’d open it together. But you don’t haveto look if you don’t want to. It’s
justa handful ofthings your mother left herethe day she went back to Sylvan to get you. I finally gave herclothesaway to the SalvationArmy, but I kept therest of her
stuff, what littlethere was. It’s been in this box ten years, I guess.’
I sat up. I could hear my heart thudding. I wondered ifAugust could hear it over there across the room. Boom-boom. Boomboom. In spite of the panic that goes
alongwith it, there’s something familiarand strangely comforting about hearing your heart beat like that. August set the box on the bed and removed the lid. I stretched
up a little to see inside the box, unable to glimpse anything, though, but white tissue paper, turning yellow around the edges. She lifted out a small bundle and peeled
away thetissue.
‘Your mother’s pocket mirror,’she said, holding it up. It was ovalshaped and surrounded by a tortoise frame, no bigger than the palmofmy hand. I eased off the
bed and slid down onto thefloor, whereI rested my back against the bed.Alittlecloser than before.Augustacted likeshe was waiting for meto reach outand takethe
mirror. I practically had to sit onmy hands. FinallyAugust lifted it up and peered insideit herself. Circles oflight bounced around on the wall behind her.
‘If you look in here, you’re gonna see your mother’s face looking back at you,’ she said. I will never look in that mirror, I thought. Laying it on the bed, August
reached into the hatbox and unwrapped a hairbrushwith a wooden handle and offered it to me. Before I thought, I took it. The handle felt funny inmy hand, cooland
smooth-edged, like it had beenworn down by excessive holding. I wondered ifshe’d brushed her haira hundred strokes every day. As I was about to hand the brush
back to August, I saw a long, black, wavy hair threaded through the bristles. I brought the brush close to my face and stared at it, mymother’s hair, a genuine part of
her body.
‘Well, I’ll be,’August said. I could not take my eyes off it. It had grown out of her head and now perched there like a thought she had left behind on the brush. I
knew then that no matter how hard you tried, no matter howmany jars of honey you threw, no matter howmuch you thought you could leave your mother behind, she
would never disappear fromthe tender places in you. I pressed my back against the bed and felt tears coming. The brush and the hair belonging to Deborah Fontanel
Owens swaminmy vision. I handed the brush back toAugust, who dropped a piece ofjewelry into my hand.Agold pin shaped likea whale with atiny black eyeand
aspout ofrhinestone watercoming fromits blowhole.
‘She was wearing that pin on her sweater the day she got here,’August said. I closed my fingers around it, then walked onmy knees over to Rosaleen’s bed and
placed italongside the pocket mirrorand the brush, moving themaround like I was working on a collage. I used to lay out my Christmas presents on the bed the same
way. There would usually befour wholethings that T. Ray had gotten thelady at the SylvanMercantileto pick out for me—sweater, socks, pajamas, sack of oranges.
MerryChristmas.You could bet your life on the gift list. I would arrangethemfor display in a verticalline, asquare, a diagonalline, any kind ofconfiguration to help me
feelliketheywerea picture oflove. When I looked up at August, she was pulling a black book fromthe box.
‘I gave your mother this whileshe was here. English poetry.’
I took the book inmy hand, leafing through the pages, noticing pencilmarks in the margins, not words, but strange little doodles, spiraling tornadoes, a flock ofVs,
squiggles with eyes, pots with lids, pots with faces, pots with curly things boiling out, little puddles that would suddenly give rise to a terrible wave. I was staring at my
mother’s private miseries, and it made me want to go outside and bury the book in the dirt. Page forty-two. That’s where I came to eight lines by WilliamBlake that
she’d underlined, some words twice. O Rose, thou art sick! Theinvisible worm, That flies in the night, In the howling storm, Has found out thy bed Ofcrimson joy,And
his dark secret love Does thy life destroy. I closed the book. I wanted the words to flow offme, but they had stuck. Mymother was WilliamBlake’s rose. I wanted
nothing so much as to tell her howsorry I was for being one oftheinvisible worms that flewin the night. I placed the book on the bed with the other things, then turned
back to August, whileshereached down into the box again,causing thetissue paper to whisper.
‘One last thing,’ she said, and she drew out a small oval picture frame of tarnished silver. When she passed it to me, she held on to my hands for a second. The
frame contained a picture ofa woman in profile, her head bent toward a little girl who sat in a high chair with a smudge of baby food on the side of her mouth. The
woman’s hair curled in forty directions, beautiful, like it had just had its hundred strokes. She held a baby spoon in her right hand. Light glazed her face. The little girl
wore a bib with a teddy bear on it. Asprig of hair on top of her head was tied with a bow. She lifted one hand toward the woman. Me and mymother. I didn’t care
about anything on this earth except the way her face was tipped toward mine, our noses just touching, how wide and gorgeous her smile was, like sparklers going off.
She had fed me with a tiny spoon. She had rubbed her nose against mine and poured her light on my face. Through the open window the air smelled like Carolina
jasmine, which is the true smell of SouthCarolina. I walked overand propped my elbows on the silland breathed as deeply as Icould. Behind me I heardAugust shift
on the cot, the legs squeak, then relax. I looked down at the picture, then closed my eyes. I figured Maymust’ve made it to heaven and explained to mymother about
thesign I wanted. The onethat would letme knowI was loved.
A
Chapter Fourteen
A queenless colony is a pitifuland melancholy community; there may be a mournful wail or lament fromwithin. Without interven- tion, the colony will die. But
introducea newqueen and the mostextravagantchangetakes place. —The QueenMust Die:And Other Affairs ofBeesand Men
fterAugustand I went through the hatbox, I drew into myselfand stayed there for a while. Augustand Zach tended to the bees and the honey, but I spent most of
my time down by theriver,alone. I just wanted to keep to myself. The month ofAugust had turned into a griddle wherethe days just lay thereand sizzled. I plucked
leaves off the elephant ear plants and fanned my face, sat withmy bare feet submerged in the trickling water, felt breezes lift off the river surface and sweep over me,
and stilleverything about me was stunned stupefied by the heat, everything except my heart. It sat likean icesculpturein thecenter ofmy chest. Nothing could touch it.
People, in general, would rather die than forgive. It’s that hard. IfGod said in plain language, ‘I’mgiving you a choice, forgive or die,’a lot of people would go ahead
and order theircoffin. I wrapped mymother’s things in the falling-apart paper, tucked themback in the hatbox, and put the lid on it. Lying onmy stomach on the floor,
pushing the box under my cot, I found a tiny pile ofmouse bones. I scooped themup and washed themin the sink. Every day I carried themaround inmy pocketand
could not imagine why I was doing it. When I woke up in the mornings, my first thought was the hatbox. It wasalmost like mymother herselfwas hiding under the bed.
One night I had to get up and move it to the other side of the room. Then I had to strip offmy pillowcase and stuff the box down inside it and tie it closed with one of
my hair ribbons. All this just so I could sleep. I would walk to the pink house to use the bathroomand think, Mymother sat on this same toilet, and then I would hate
myselffor thinking it. Who cared whereshesat to pee? She hadn’tcared a wholelotabout my bathroomhabits when sheabandoned meto Mrs. Watson and T. Ray. I
gave myself pep talks. Don’t think about her. It is overand done. The nextminute, I swear to God, I would be picturing her in the pink house, or out by the wailingwall,
stuffing her burdensamong thestones. I would’ve bet twenty dollars T. Ray’s name was squashed into thecracksand crevices out there. Maybethe name Lilywas out
there, too. I wished she’d been smartenough, or loving enough, to realizeeverybody has burdens thatcrush them, only they don’t give up theirchildren. In a weird way
I must haveloved my littlecollection of hurtsand wounds. They provided me with somereal nicesympathy, with thefeeling I wasexceptional. I was the girlabandoned
by her mother. I was the girlwho kneeled on grits. WhataspecialcaseI was. We were deep into mosquito season, so alot ofwhat I did by theriver was swatat them.
Sitting in the purple shadows, I pulled out the mouse bones and worked thembetweenmy fingers. I stared at things untilI seemed to melt right into them. Sometimes I
would forget lunch, and Rosaleenwould comefind me, bearing atomato sandwich.After sheleft, I would throwit in theriver.At times Icould not prevent myselffrom
lying flat on the ground, pretending I was inside one of those beehive tombs. I felt the same way I did right after May died, only multiplied by a hundred. August had
said, ‘I guess you need to grievealittle while. So go ahead and do it.’
But nowthat I was doing it, Icouldn’t seemto stop. I knewthatAugust must haveexplained everything to Zach, and June, too, becausethey tiptoed around melike
I wasa psychiatric case. Maybe I was. Maybe I was the one who belonged on Bull Street, not mymother. At least no one prodded, orasked questions, or said, ‘For
Pete’s sake, snap out ofit.’
I wondered howmuch longer it would be before August had to act on thethings I’d told her—merunning away, helpingRosaleen escape. Rosaleen,afugitive.
August was givingme time for now, time to be by the river and do what I had to do, the same way she gave herself time there after May died. But it wouldn’t last
forever. It is the peculiar nature of the world to go on spinning no matter what sort of heartbreak is happening. June set a wedding date, Saturday, October 10. Neil’s
brother, anAfricanMethodi/episcopalreverend fromAlbany, Georgia, was going to marry themin the backyard under the myrtletrees. Junelaid outall their plans one
nightat dinner. She would come walking down an aisle ofrose petals, wearing a whiterayon suit with frog closings that Mabelee was sewing for her. Icould not picture
frog closings. June drew a picture of one on a tablet, and afterward I stillcould not picture them. Lunelle had been commissioned to make her a wedding hat, which I
thought was very courageous ofJune. There was no tellingwhat she would end up with on her head. Rosaleen offered to bakethe wedding cakelayers, and Violetand
Queenie were going to decorateit with a‘rainbowtheme.’
Again, allI can say is how brave June was. One afternoon I went to the kitchen in the middle of the afternoon, nearly dying of thirst, wanting to filla jugwithwater
and take it back to the river, and found June and August clinging to each other in the middle of the floor. I stood outside the door and watched, even though it was a
private moment. June gripped August’s back,and her hands trembled.
‘Maywould’veloved this wedding,’ shesaid.
‘She must’vetold mea hundred times I was being stubborn about Neil. Oh, God, August, why didn’t I do itsooner, whileshe was stillalive?’
August turned slightly and caught sight ofme in the doorway. She held June, who was starting to cry, but she kept her eyes onmine. She said, ‘Regrets don’t help
anything, you knowthat.’
The next day I actually felt like eating. I wandered in for lunch to find Rosaleen wearing a new dress and her hair freshly plaited. She was poking tissues into her
bosomfor safekeeping.
‘Where did you get that dress?’ I said. She turned a circle, modeling it, and when I smiled, she turned another one. It was what youwould calla tent dress—yards
ofmaterial falling fromher shoulders without benefit ofwaistband and darts. It had a bright red background with giant white flowers all over it. I could see she was in
love with it.
‘August took meinto town yesterday,and I bought it,’ shesaid. I feltstartled suddenly by thethings that had been going onwithoutme.
‘Your dress is pretty,’I lied, noticing for thefirst timethere were no lunch fixingsanywhere. Shesmoothed her hands down thefront ofit, looked at theclock on the
stove,and reached foran old white vinyl purse ofMay’s thatshe’d inherited.
‘You going somewhere?’ I said.
‘Shesureis,’ said August, stepping into theroom, smiling at Rosaleen.
‘I’mgonnafinishwhat I started,’ Rosaleen said, lifting herchin.
‘I’mgonnaregister to vote.’
My arms dropped bymy sides,and mymouth came open.
‘But whatabout—whatabout you being…you know?’
Rosaleen squinted atme.
‘What?’
‘Afugitivefromjustice,’ I said.
‘What ifthey recognize your name? What if you getcaught?’
Icutmy eyes overat August.
‘Oh, I don’t think there’ll bea problem,’ Augustsaid, taking thetruck keys offthe brass nail by the door.
‘We’re going to the voter driveat the Negro high school.’
‘But—’
‘For heaven’s sake,allI’mdoing is gettingmy voter’scard,’ said Rosaleen.
‘That’s what you said last time,’ I told her. Sheignored that. Shestrapped May’s purse on herarm. Asplit ran fromthe handlearound onto theside.
‘Youwannacome, Lily?’ said August. I did and I didn’t. I looked down atmy feet, tanned and bare.
‘I’lljuststay hereand makesomelunch.’
August lifted hereyebrows.
‘It’s niceto see you’re hungry forachange.’
Theywent onto the back porch, down thesteps. I followed themto thetruck. As Rosaleen got in, I said, ‘Don’tspit on anybody’s shoes, okay?’
She let out a laugh that made her whole body shake. It looked like all the flowers on her dress were bobbing in a gust ofwind. I went back inside, boiled two hot
dogs, and atethemwithout buns. Then I headed back to the woods, whereI picked afewbachelor buttons that grewwild in the plots ofsunshine before getting bored
and tossing themaway. I sat on the ground, expecting to sink down into my dark mood and think about my mother, but the only thoughts I had were for Rosaleen. I
pictured her standing in aline of people. Icould almost see her practicingwriting her name. Getting it just right. Her bigmoment. Suddenly I wished I’d gone with them.
I wished it more than anything. I wanted to see her face when they handed her her card. I wanted to say, Rosaleen, you know what? I’mproud of you. What was I
doing sitting out here in the woods? I got up and went inside. Passing the telephone in the hallway, I had an urge to call Zach. To become part of the world again. I
dialed his number. When heanswered, I said, ‘So what’s new?’
‘Who’s this?’ hesaid.
‘Very funny,’ I told him.
‘I’msorry about…everything,’ hesaid.
‘August told me what happened.’
Silencefloated between usa moment,and then hesaid, ‘Will you haveto go back?’
‘Youmean back to my father?’
He hesitated.
‘Yeah.’
The minute hesaid it, I had thefeeling that’sexactlywhat would happen. Everything inmy body felt it.
‘I supposeso,’I said. Icoiled the phonecord around my fingerand stared down the hallat thefront door. Forafewseconds I was unableto look away, imagining
myselfleaving through itand notcoming back.
‘I’llcomesee you,’ hesaid,and I wanted to cry. Zach knocking on the door ofT. RayOwens’s house. Itcould never happen.
‘Iasked youwhat was new, remember?’
I didn’texpectanythingwas, but I needed to changethesubject.
‘Well, for starters, I’ll be going to the white high schoolthis year.’
I was speechless. I squeezed the phoneinmy hand.
‘Are you sure youwanna do that?’ I said. I knewwhat those places werel.
‘Somebody’s got to,’ hesaid.
‘Mightas well be me.’
Both of us, it seemed like, were doomed to misery. Rosaleen came home, a bona fide registered voter in the United States ofAmerica. We all sat around that
evening, waiting to eat dinner, whileshe personally called every one ofthe Daughters on thetelephone.
‘I just wanted to tell you I’maregistered voter,’shesaid each time,and there would bea pause,and then she’d say, ‘President Johnson and Mr. Hubert Humphrey,
that’s who. I’mnot voting for Mr. Pisswater.’
Shelaughed every time, likethis was thejoke ofjokes. She would say, ‘Goldwater, Pisswater, get it?’
This went on even after dinner, just whenwe’d think she had it out of her system, out ofthecomplete blue, she’d say, ‘I’ll becastingmy votefor Mr. Johnson.’ When she finally wound down and said good night, I watched her climb the stairs wearing her red-and-white voter-registration dress, and I wished again that I’d
been there. Regrets don’t help anything,August had told June, you knowthat. I ran up thestairsand grabbed Rosaleen frombehind, stopping her with onefoot poised
in theair, searching for the nextstep. I wrapped my armsaround her middle.
‘I love you,’I blurted out, noteven knowing I was going to say this. That night when the katydids and tree frogs and every other sicalcreature were wound up and
going strong, I walked around the honey house, feeling like I had spring fever. It was ten o’clock at night, and I honestly felt like I could’ve scrubbed the floors and
washed the windows. I went over to the shelves and straightened all the mason jars, then took the broom and swept the floor, up under the holding tank and the
generator, where nobody had swept for fifty years, it looked like. I stillwasn’t tired, so I stripped thesheets offmy bed and went over to the pink houseand gotaset of
clean ones, careful to tiptoe around and not wake anybody up. I got dust rags and Comet cleanser in case I needed them. I came back, and before I knew it I was
involved in a fullblown cleaning frenzy. Bymidnight I had the place shining. I evenwent throughmy stuffand got rid ofsome things. Old pencils, a couple ofstories I’d
written that weretoo embarrassing foranybody to read, atorn pair ofshorts, acomb withmost ofits teethmissing. Next I gathered up the mouse bones that I’d kept in
my pockets, realizing I didn’t need to carry themaround anymore. But I knewIcouldn’t throwthemaway either, so I tied themtogether with ared hair ribbon and set
themon the shelf by the fan. I stared at thema minute, wondering how a person got attached to mouse bones. I decided sometimes you just need to nurse something,
that’s all. By now I was starting to get tired, but I took my mother’s things out of the hatbox—her tortoiseshellmirror, her brush, the poetry book, her whale pin, the
picture of us with our faces to- gether—and set themup on theshelfwith the mouse bones. I haveto say, it made the whole roomlook different. Drifting offto sleep, I
thoughtabout her. Hownobody is perfect. Howyou just haveto close youreyesand breathe outand let the puzzle ofthe human heart be what it is. The next morning I
showed up in the kitchenwith the whale pin fastened to my favorite bluetop. ANat KingColerecord was going.
‘Unforgettable, that’s what you are.’
I think it was on to drown out all the commotion the pink Lady Kenmore washer was making on the porch. It was a wondrous invention, but it sounded like a
cement mixer.August sat with herelbows on thetabletop, drinking thelast of hercoffeeand reading another book fromthe bookmobile. When shelifted hereyes, they
took inmy face, then went straight to the whale pin. I saw her smile before she went back to her book. I fixed my standard Rice Krispies with raisins. After I finished
eating, Augustsaid, ‘Come on out to the hives. I need to showyou something.’ We got all decked out in our bee outfits—at least I did. August hardly ever wore anything but the hat and veil. Walking out there, August widened her step to miss
squashing an ant. It reminded me ofMay. I said, ‘It was Maywho gotmymother started saving roaches, wasn’t it?’
‘Who else?’ shesaid,and smiled.
‘It happened when your mother was a teenager. May caught her killing a roachwith a fly swatter. She said, ‘Deborah Fontanel, every living creature on the earth is
special. Youwant to bethe onethat putsan end to one ofthem?’
‘Then sheshowed her howto makeatrail ofmarshmallowsand grahamcrackers.’
I fingered the whale pin on my shoulder, picturing the whole thing. Then I looked around and noticed the world. It was such a pretty day you couldn’t imagine
anything coming along to spoil it. According to August, if you’ve never seen a cluster of beehives first thing in the morning, you’ve missed the eighth wonder of the
world. Picture these white boxes tucked under pine trees. The sunwillslant through the branches, shining in the sprinkles of dew drying on the lids. There will be a few
hundred bees doing laps around the hive boxes, just warming up, but mostly taking their bathroombreak, as bees are so clean they will not soil the side of their hives.
Froma distanceit will look likea big painting youmight seein a museum, but museumscan’tcapturethesound. Fifty feetaway youwill hear it, a humming that sounds
like itcame fromanother planet. At thirty feet your skinwillstart to vibrate. The hair will lift on your neck. Your head willsay, Don’t go any farther, but your heart will
send you straight into the hum, where you will be swallowed by it. You willstand there and think, I amin the center of the universe, where everything is sung to life.
August lifted thelid offa hive.
‘This one is missing its queen,’she said. I’d learned enough beekeeping to know that a hive without a queen was a death sentence for the bees. They would stop
work and go around completely demoralized.
‘What happened?’ I said.
‘I discovered it yesterday. The bees were sitting out here on the landing board lookingmelancholy. If you see bees loafing and lamenting, you can bet their queen is
dead. So I searched through thecombs,and sureenough she was gone. I don’t knowwhatcaused it. Maybeit was just her time.’
‘What do you do now?’
‘I called the County Extension, and they put me in touchwith a man inGoose Creek who said he’d drive over with a new queen sometime today. I want to get the
hiverequeened before one ofthe workers starts laying. Ifwe get layingworkers, we’ve got ourselvesa mess.’
‘I didn’t knowa worker beecould lay eggs,’ I said.
‘Allthey can do, really, is lay unfertilized droneeggs. They’llfill up thecombs with them,and as the workers naturally die off, thereare noneto replacethem.’
As shelowered thelid, shesaid, ‘I just wanted to showyouwhata queenlesscolony looked like.’
Shelifted back the veils fromher hat, then lifted mine back, too. She held my gaze whileI studied the gold flecks in hereyes.
‘Remember when I told you thestory ofBeatrix,’ shesaid, ‘the nunwho ran away fromherconvent? Remember howthe VirginMary stood in for her?’
‘I remember,’ I said.
‘I figured you knewI’d run away like Beatrix did. Youweretrying to tellmethat Marywas standing in for meat home, taking care ofthings tillI went back.’
‘Oh, that’s not what I was trying to tell you atall,’ shesaid.
‘Youweren’t therunaway I was thinking about. I was thinking about your mother running away. I was just trying to plantalittleideain your head.’
‘What idea?’
‘Thatmaybe Our Lady could act for Deborah and belikeastand-inmother for you.’
Thelight was making patterns on the grass. I stared at them, feeling shy about what I was going to say.
‘I told Our Lady one night in the pink housethat she was mymother. I put my hand on her heart the way you and the Daughtersalways do at your meetings. I know
I tried it that one time before and fainted, but this time I stayed onmy feet, and for a while after that I really did feelstronger. Then I seemed to lose it. I think what I
need is to go back and touch her heartagain.’
Augustsaid, ‘Listen to me now, Lily. I’mgoing to tell you something I want you always to remember,allright?’
Her face had grown serious, intent. Hereyes did not blink.
‘Allright,’ I said,and I feltsomething electricslide downmy spine.
‘Our Lady is not some magical being out there somewhere, like a fairy godmother. She’s not the statue in the parlor. She’s something inside of you. Do you
understand what I’mtelling you?’
‘Our Lady is inside me,’ I repeated, notsureI did.
‘You haveto find a mother inside yourself. Weall do. Even ifwealready havea mother, westill haveto find this part of ourselves inside.’
She held out her hand to me.
‘Give me your hand.’
I lifted my left hand and placed it in hers. Shetook itand pressed theflat ofmy palmup againstmy chest, over my beating heart.
‘You don’t haveto put your hand onMary’s heart to getstrength and consolation and rescue,and allthe other things we need to get through life,’ shesaid.
‘You can placeit right here on your own heart. Your own heart.’
Auguststepped closer. She kept the pressuresteady againstmy hand.
‘All those times your father treated youmean, Our Lady was the voice in you that said, ‘No, I will not bow down to this. I amLily Melissa Owens, I will not bow
down.’ Whether you could hear this voice or not, she was in theresaying it.’
I took my other hand and placed it on top of hers,and she moved her free hand on top ofit, so we had this black-and-whitestack of hands resting uponmy chest.
‘When you’re unsure of yourself,’she said, ‘when you start pulling back into doubt and small living, she’s the one inside saying, ‘Get up fromthere and live like the
glorious girl you are.’
She’s the power inside you, you understand?’
Her hands stayed wheretheywere but released their pressure.
‘And whatever it is that keeps widening your heart, that’s Mary, too, not only the power inside you but the love. And when you get down to it, Lily, that’s the only
purpose grand enough fora human life. Not just to love—but to persist in love.’
She paused. Bees drummed their sound into theair. August retrieved her hands fromthe pile onmy chest, but I leftminethere.
‘This Mary I’mtalking aboutsits in your heartall day long, saying, ‘Lily, you are my everlasting home. Don’t you ever beafraid. Iamenough. Weareenough.’
‘Iclosed my eyes,and in thecoolness ofmorning, thereamong the bees, I felt for oneclear instant whatshe was talking about. When I opened my eyes,August was
nowhere around. I looked back toward the house and saw her crossing the yard, her white dress catching the light. The knock on the door came at 2:00 PM I was
sitting in the parlor writing in the newnotebook Zach had leftat my door, setting down everything that had happened to mesince MaryDay. Words streamed out ofme
so fast I couldn’t keep up with them, and that’s all I was thinking about. I didn’t pay attention to the knock. Later I would remember it didn’t sound like an ordinary
knock. Morelikeafist pounding. I kept writing, waiting for August to answer it. I was sureit was the man fromGoose Creek with the newqueen bee.
The pounding came again. June had gone off with Neil. Rosaleen was in the honey house washing a new shipment of mason jars, a job that belonged to me, but
she’d volunteered for it, seeing how badly I needed to write everything out. I didn’t know whereAugust was. Probably in the honey house, helping Rosa- leen. I look
back and wonder: howdid I not guess who was there? Thethird timethe knocking came, I got up and opened the door. T. Ray stared at me, clean-shaven, wearing a
white short sleeved shirt with chest hair curling through the neck opening. He was smiling. Not a smile ofsweet adoring, I hasten to say, but the fat grin ofa man who
has been rabbit hunting all day long and has just nowfound his prey backed up in a hollowlogwith no way out. Hesaid, ‘Well, well, well. Look who’s here.’
I had a sudden, terror-stricken thought he might that second dragme out to his truck and hightail it straight back to the peach farm, where I would never be heard
fromagain. I stepped backward into the hallway,andwithaforced politeness thatsurprised meand seemed to throwhimoffstride, I said, ‘Won’t you comein?’ Whatelse was I going to do?I turned and forced myselfto walk calmly into the parlor. His bootsclomped after me.
‘Allright, goddamn it,’ hesaid, speaking to the back ofmy head.
‘If youwant to pretend I’mmaking asocial visit, we’ll pretend, but thisain’tasocial visit, you hear me?I spent halfmy summer looking for you, and I’mgonnatake
you out of here niceand quiet or kicking and screaming—don’tmatter which to me.’
I motioned to arocking chair.
‘Haveaseat if youwant to.’
I was trying to look ho-hum, when inside I was close to full blown panic. Where was August? My breath had turned into short, shallow puffs, a dog pant. He
flopped into therockerand pushed back and forth, that got-you-nowgrin glued on his face.
‘So you’ve been herethe wholetime, stayingwith colored women. Jesus Christ.’ Without realizing it, I’d backed over to thestatue ofOur Lady. I stood, immobilized, while helooked her over.
‘What the hellis that?’
‘Astatue ofMary,’ I said.
‘You know, Jesus’ mother.’
My voicesounded skittish inmy throat. Inside, I was rackingmy brain for something to do.
‘Well, it looks likesomething fromthejunkyard,’ hesaid.
‘Howdid you find me?’
Sliding up on theedge ofthecaneseat, he dug in his pants pocket until he brought up his knife, the one he used to clean his nails with.
‘It was youwho led me here,’ hesaid, puffed up and pleased as punch to sharethe news.
‘I did no such thing.’
Hetugged the blade out ofthe knife bed, pushed the point into thearmoftherocker,and carved out littlechunks ofwood, taking his sweet timeto explain.
‘Oh, you led me here, all right. Yesterday the phone billcame, and guess what I found on there? One collect call froma lawyer’s office in Tiburon. Mr. Clayton
Forrest. Bigmistake, Lily,callingmecollect.’
‘Youwent to Mr. Clayton’sand hetold youwhereI was?’
‘No, but he hasan old-lady secretarywho was morethan happy to fillmein. Shesaid I would find you right here.’
Stupid Miss Lacy.
‘Where’s Rosaleen?’ hesaid.
‘She took offa long time ago,’ I lied. He might kidnap me back to Sylvan, but there was no need for himto know where Rosa- leen was. I could spare her that
much at least. He didn’tcomment onRosaleen, though. Heseemed happy to carve up thearmoftherocking chair like he wasall ofeleven years old, putting his initials
in atree. I think he was glad he didn’t haveto foolwith her. I wondered howI would survive back in Sylvan. Without Rosaleen. Suddenly hestopped rocking, and the
nauseating smile faded off his mouth. He was staring at my shoulder with his eyes squinted almost to the closed position. I looked down to see what had grabbed his
attention and realized he was staring at the whale pin onmy shirt. He got to his feetand walked over to me, deliberately stopping four or fivefeetaway, likethe pin had
some kind of voodoo curse on it.
‘Where did you get that?’ hesaid. My hand went up involuntarily and touched thelittlerhine- stonespout.
‘August gaveit to me. The womanwho lives here.’
‘Don’t lieto me.’
‘I’mnot lying. She gave it to me. She said it belonged to—‘ I was afraid to say it. He didn’t know anything about August and my mother. His upper lip had gone
white, the way it did when he was badly upset.
‘I gavethat pin to your mother on her twenty-second birthday,’ hesaid.
‘You tellmeright now, howdid this August woman get it?’
‘You gavethis pin to mymother? You did?’
‘Answer me, damn it.’
‘This is where mymothercame when sheran away fromus. Augustsaid she was wearing it the day she got here.’
He walked back to therocker, shaken-looking,and eased down onto theseat.
‘I’ll be goddamned,’ hesaid, so lowIcould hardly hear him.
‘August used to take care of her back when she was a little girl in Virginia,’ I said, trying to explain. He stared into the air, into nothing. Through the window, out
there in the Carolina summer, I could see the sun beating down on the roof of his truck, lighting up the tips of the picket fence that had all but disappeared under the
jasmine. Thetruck was spattered withmud, like he’d been trolling theswamps looking for me.
‘I should have known.’
He was shaking his head, talking likeI wasn’t in theroom.
‘I looked for hereverywhereIcould think. And she was right here. Jesus Christ, she was right here.’
The thought seemed to awe him. He shook his head and looked around, as if thinking, I bet she sat in this chair. I bet she walked on this rug. His chin quivered
slightly,and for thefirst timeit hitme howmuch he must’veloved her, howit had split himopenwhen sheleft. Beforecoming here, mywholelife had been nothing buta
hole where mymother should have been, and this hole had made me different, left me always aching for something, but never once did I think what he’d lost or how it
might’ve changed him. I thought about August’s words. People can start out one way, and by the time life gets through with themthey end up completely different. I
don’t doubt hestarted offloving your mother. In fact, I think he worshiped her. I had never known T. Ray to worship anyoneexcept Snout, the dog love of his life, but
seeing himnow, I knew he’d loved Deborah Fontanel, and when she’d left him, he’d sunk into bitterness. He jabbed the knife into the wood and got to his feet. I
looked at the handlesticking in theair, then at T. Ray as he walked around theroomtouching things, the piano, the hatrack,a Look magazine on the drop-leaftable.
‘Looks like you’re here by yourself?’ he said. Icould feel itcoming. The end ofeverything. He walked straight toward me and reached for my arm. When, I jerked
away, he brought his hand across my face. T. Ray had slapped me lots of times before, clean, sharp smacks on the cheek, the kind that cause you to draw a quick,
stunned breath, but this was something else, notaslap atall. This time he’d hit mefullforce. I’d heard the grunt ofexertion escape his lipsas the blowlanded, seen the
momentary bulge of his eyes. And I’d smelled the farmon his hand, smelled peaches. The impact threw me backward into Our Lady. She crashed onto the floor a
second before I did. I didn’t feel the pain at first, but sitting up, gatheringmy feet under me, it slashed frommy ear down to my chin. It caused me to drop back again
onto thefloor. I stared up at himwithmy handsclutched atmy chest, wondering if he would pullme bymy feet outsideto his truck. He was shouting.
‘Howdare you leave me! You need alesson, is what you need!’
I filled my lungs with air, tried to steady myself. Black Mary lay beside me on the floor, giving off the overpowering smell of honey. I remembered how we’d
smoothed it into her, every littlecrack and grain tillshe was honey-logged and satisfied. I lay thereafraid to move, aware ofthe knifestuck in thearmofthechairacross
theroom. He kicked atme, his boot landing inmy calf, likeI wasatin can in theroad that he mightas well kick becauseit was therein front of him. Hestood over me.
‘Deborah,’ I heard himmumble.
‘You’re not leavingmeagain.’
Hiseyes looked frantic, scared. I wondered ifI’d heard himright. I noticed my hands stillcupped over my chest. I pressed themdown, hard into my flesh.
‘Get up!’ he yelled.
‘I’mtaking you home.’
He had me by the armin one swoop, liftingme up. Once onmy feet, I wrenched away and ran for the door. He came after me and caught me by the hair. Twisting
to face him, I sawhe had the knife. He waved it in front ofmy face.
‘You’re going back withme!’ he yelled.
‘You never should haveleftme.’
Itcrossed mymind that he was no longer talking to me but to Deborah. Like his mind had snapped back ten years.
‘T. Ray,’ I said.
‘It’s me—Lily.’
He didn’t hear me. He had afistful ofmy hairand wouldn’t let go.
‘Deborah,’ hesaid.
‘Goddamn bitch,’ he said. He seemed crazy with anguish, reliving a pain he’d kept locked up all this time, and now that it was loose, it had overwhelmed him. I
wondered howfar he’d go to try and take Deborah back. ForallI knew, he might kill her. Iamyoureverlasting home. Iamenough. We are enough. I looked into his
eyes. Theywerefull ofastrangefogginess.
‘Daddy,’ I said. I shouted it.
‘Daddy!’Helooked startled, then stared at me, breathing hard. Heturned loose my hairand dropped the knife on therug. I stumbled backward and caught myself.
I heard myself panting. The sound filled up the room. I didn’t want himto see me look down at the knife, but I couldn’t help myself. I glanced over to where it was. When I looked back at him, he was stillstaring atme. Fora moment neither of us moved. Icouldn’t read hisexpression. Mywhole bodywas shaking, but I felt I had to
keep talking.
‘I’m—I’msorry I left like I did,’ I said, taking smallsteps backward. The skin over his eyes sagged down onto his eyelids. He looked away, toward the window,
like he was contemplating the road that had brought her here. I heard a creaking floorboard in the hallway outside. Turning, I sawAugust and Rosaleen at the door. I
gavethema quiet signalwithmy hand, waving themaway. I think I just needed to seeit through bymyself, to be with himwhile hecame back to his senses. Heseemed
so harmless, standing there now. Fora moment I thought theywere going to ignore meand comein anyway, but thenAugust put her hand onRosaleen’sarmand they
eased out ofsight. WhenT. Ray turned back, hefastened hiseyes onme,and there was nothing in thembutan ocean of hurt. Helooked at the pin onmy shirt.
‘You look like her,’ hesaid,and himsaying that, I knewhe’d said everything. I leaned overand picked up his knife, bent the bladeclosed,and handed it to him.
‘It’s all right,’ I said. But it wasn’t. I had seen into the dark doorway that he kept hidden inside, the terrible place he would seal up now and never return to if he
could help it. He seemed suddenly ashamed. I watched himpushing out his lips, trying to gather back his pride, his anger, all that thunderclap he’d firstcome striding in
here with. His hands were moving in and out of his pockets.
‘We’re going home,’ he said. I didn’t answer him, but walked over to Our Ladywhere she lay on the floor and lifted her upright. I could feelAugust and Rosaleen
outsidethe door,could almost hear their breathing. I touched my cheek. It was swellingwhere he’d hitme.
‘I’mstaying here,’ I said.
‘I’mnot leaving.’
The words hung there, hard and gleaming. Like pearls I’d been fashioning down inside my belly for weeks.
‘What did you say?’
‘I said I’mnot leaving.’
‘You think I’mgonna walk out of hereand leave you?I don’teven knowthese damn people.’
Heseemed to struggleto make his words forcefulenough. Theanger had beenwashed out of himwhen he’d dropped the knife.
‘I knowthem,’ I said.
‘August Boatwright isa good person.’
‘Whatmakes you think she would evenwant you here?’
‘Lily can have a home here for as long as she wants,’August said, stepping into the room, Rosaleen right beside her. I went and stood with them. Outside, I heard
Queenie’scar pullinto the driveway. It had a muffler you couldn’tmistake. ApparentlyAugust had called the Daughters.
‘Lily said you’d run off,’ T. Ray said to Rosaleen.
‘Well, I guess I’mback now,’ shesaid.
‘I don’tcare wherethe hell you are or where you end up,’ hesaid to her.
‘But Lily’scomingwithme.’
Even as he said it, I could tell he didn’t want me, didn’t want me back on the farm, didn’t want to be reminded of her. Another part of him—the good part, if there
was such a thing—might even be thinking that I’d be better off here. It was pride now, all pride. How could he back down? The front door opened, and Queenie,
Violet, Lunelle,and Mabeleestumbled into the house,allwound up and looking likethey had theirclothes on backward. Queeniestared atmy cheek.
‘Everybody allright?’ shesaid, out of breath.
‘We’reallright,’ said August.
‘This is Mr. Owens, Lily’s father. Hecamefora visit.’
‘I didn’t get an answer at Sugar-Girl’s or Cressie’s house,’ Queenie said. The four of themlined up beside us, clutching their pocketbooks up against their bodies
like theymight have to use themto beat the living hell out ofsomebody. I wondered how we must look to him. Abunch ofwomen—Mabelee four foot ten, Lunelle’s
hair standing straight up on her head begging to be braided, Violet muttering, ‘Blessed Mary,’and Queenie—tough old Queenie—with her hands on her hipsand her lip
shoved out, every inch of her saying, I double-dog dare you to take this girl. T. Ray sniffed hard and looked at the ceiling. His resolve was crumbling allaround him.
You could practically see bits ofit flaking off. Augustsawit, too. Shestepped forward.
Sometimes I forgot howtallshe was.
‘Mr. Owens, youwould be doing Lily and therest of usafavor by leaving her here. I made her my apprentice beekeeper, and she’s learning the whole businessand
helping us out with all her hard work. Welove Lily,and we’lltakecare of her, I promise you that. We’llstart her in school hereand keep her straight.’
I’d heard Augustsaymorethan once, ‘If you need something fromsomebody,always givethat person a way to hand it to you.’
T. Ray needed aface-savingway to hand me over,and August was giving it to him. My heart pounded. I watched him. Helooked onceatme, then let his hand drop
to his side.
‘Good riddance,’ he said, and moved toward the door. We had to open up our little wall ofwomen to let himthrough. The front door banged against the back wall
as hejerked it open and walked out. Wealllooked ateach otherand didn’t say a word. Weseemed to havesucked alltheair fromtheroomand were holding it down
in our lungs, waiting to be sure we could let it out. I heard himcrank the truck, and before reason could stop me, I broke into a run, racing into the yard after him.
Rosaleen called after me, but there was no timeto explain. Thetruck was backing along the driveway, kicking up dirt. I waved my arms.
‘Stop, stop!’ He braked, then glared at me through the windshield. Behind me, August, Rosaleen, and the Daughters rushed onto the front porch. I walked to the
truck dooras heleaned his head out the window.
‘I just haveto ask you,’ I said.
‘What?’
‘That daymymother died, you said when I picked up the gun, it went off.’
My eyes were on hiseyes.
‘I need to know,’ I said.
‘Did I do it?’
The colors in the yard shifted with the clouds, turned fromyel- low to light green. He ran his hand across his face, stared into his lap, thenmoved his eyes back to
me. When hespoke, theroughness was gonefromhis voice.
‘Icould tell you I did it. That’s what youwanna hear. Icould tell you she did it to herself, but bothways I’d belying. It was youwho did it, Lily.You didn’t mean it,
but it was you.’
Helooked atmea moment longer. Then heinched backward out leavingme with thesmell oftruck oil. The bees wereeverywhere, hovering over the hydrangeaand
the myrtlespread across thelawn, thejasmineat the wood’sedge, thelemon balmclustered at thefence. Maybe he was tellingmethetruth, but you could never know
a hundred percent with T. Ray. He drove away slowly, not tearing down the road like I expected. I watched till he was gone fromsight, then turned and looked at
August and Rosaleen and the Daughters on the porch. This is the moment I remember clearest ofall—how I stood in the driveway looking back at them. I remember
the sight ofthemstanding there waiting. All these women, all this love, waiting. I looked one last time at the highway. I remember thinking that he probably loved me in
his own smallish way. He had for- feited me over, hadn’t he? I still tellmyself that when he drove away that day he wasn’t saying good riddance; he was saying, Oh,
Lily, you’re better off there in that house ofcolored women. You never would’ve flowered with me like you will with them. I know that is an absurd thought, but I
believe in the goodness of imagination. Sometimes I imagine a package will come from him at Christmastime, not the same old sweater-socks-pajama routine but
something really inspired, likeafourteen-karat-gold charmbracelet,and in hiscard he willwrite, ‘Love, T. Ray.’
He will use the word ‘love,’and the world will not stop spinning but go right on in its courses, like the river, like the bees, like everything. Aperson shouldn’t look
too far down her nose at absurdities. Look at me. I dived into one absurd thing after another, and here I amin the pink house. I wake up to wonder every day. In the
autumn South Carolina changed her color to ruby red and wild shades of orange. I watch themnow frommy upstairs room, the roomJune left behind when she got
married last month. I could not have dreamed such a room. August bought me a new bed and a dressing table, white French Provincial fromthe Sears and Roebuck
catalog. Violet and Queenie donated a flowered rug that had been laying around in their extra roomgoing to waste, and Mabelee sewed blue-and-white polka dot
curtains for the windows with fringe balls along the hem. Cressie crocheted four eight-legged octopuses out of various colors of yarn to sit on the bed. One octopus
would have been enough for me, but it’s the only handicraft Cressie knows how to do, so she just keeps doing it. Lunelle created me a hat that outdid every other hat
she’d ever made, including June’s wedding hat. It reminds me a little ofthe pope’s hat. It is tall, just goes up into the airand keeps going. It does have more roundness
than the pope’s hat, however. I expected blue, but no, she sewed it in golds and browns. I think it’s supposed to be an old-fashioned beehive. I only wear it to the
Daughters ofMarymeetings, sinceanywhereelseit would stop trafficfor miles. Clayton comes overeveryweek to talk to usabout howhe’s working things out for me
and Rosaleen back in Sylvan. He says you cannot beat up somebody in jailand expect to get away with it. Even so, he says, they will drop all the charges against me
and Rosaleen by Thanksgiving. Sometimes Clayton brings his daughter Becca over when hecomes. She’sa year younger thanme. Ialways picture her likesheis in the
photograph in his office, holding his hand, jumping a wave. I keep mymother’s things on a specialshelf inmy room, and I let Becca look at thembut not touch. One
day I will let her pick themup, since it seems that’s what a girlfriend would do. The feeling that they are holy objects is already starting to wear off. Before long I’ll be
handingBecca mymother’s brush, saying, ‘Here, youwanna brush your hair with this? Youwanna wear this whale pin?’
Beccaand I watch for Zach in thelunchroomand sit with himevery chance we get. We havereputationsas ‘nigger lovers,’which is howit is put to us,and when the
ignoramuses ball up their notebook paperand throwitat Zach in the hallway, which seems to beafavorite pastime between classes, Beccaand Iarejustas likely to get
popped in the head as heis. Zach says weshould walk on the other side ofthe hallfromhim. Wesay, ‘Balled-up notebook paper—big deal.’
In the photograph bymy bed mymother is perpetually smiling onme. I guess I have forgiven us both, although sometimes in the night my dreams will take me back
to thesadness, and I haveto wake up and forgive usagain. I sit inmy newroomand writeeverything down. My heart never stops talking. Iamthe wall keeper now. I
keep it fed with prayersand fresh rocks. I wouldn’t besurprised ifMay’s wailingwall outlasted usall.At theend oftime, when all the world’s buildings havecrumbled
away, thereit will be. Each day I visit black Mary, who looksat me with her wiseface, older than old and ugly in a beautifulway. It seems thecrevices run deeper into
her body each time I see her, that her wooden skin ages before my eyes. I never get tired of looking at her thick armjutting out, her fist like a bulb about to explode.
She is a muscle of love, this Mary. I feel her in unexpected moments, herAssumption into heaven happening in places inside me. She willsuddenly rise, and when she
does, she does not go up, up into thesky, but furtherand further inside me.August says she goes into the holes life has gouged out of us. This is theautumn ofwonders,
yet every day, every single day, I go back to that burned afternoon inAugust when T. Ray left. I go back to that one moment when I stood in the drivewaywith small
rocks and clumps of dirtaround my feetand looked back at the porch. And there theywere. All these mothers. I have more mothers than any eight girls offthe street.
They arethe moons shining over me.
THE END